THE TEMPEST 


PERSONS REPRESENTED 


Alonso, King of Naples, 

Sebastian, his brother, 

Prospero, (he rightful Duke of Milan. 
Antonio, Ms bi other, the usurping Duke of 
Milan. 

Ferdinand, son to the King of Naples. 
Gonzalo, an honest old Counsellor of Naples 
Adrian, ( 

Francisco, \ 

Caliban, a savage and deformed Slave. 
Trinculo, a Jester. 

Stephano, a drunken Butler. 


Master of a Ship, Boatswain, and iWariners. 


Miranda, daughter to Prosper©. 


Ariel, an airy Spirit. 


Iris, 

Ceres, 

Juno, ),Spirits, 

Nymphs, 

Reaj^rs, 

Other Spirits attending on Prosper©. 


Scene, ~ The Sea, with a Ship: afterwards an uninhabited Island. 


ACT I. 

Scene i.—On a Ship at Sea.— A Storm, 
with Thunder and Lightning. 

Enter a SMpmastei and a Boatswain. 

Master. Boatswain,-™ 

Boats. Here, master: what cheer? 

Master. Good: Speak to the manners: fall 
to *t yarely, or we run ourselves aground; 
bestir, bestir. [Exit. 

Enter Mariners. 

Boats. Heigh, my hearts; cheerly, cheerly, 
my hearts; yare, yare: take in the top-sail; 
’'Tend to the master’s whistle. Blow till thou 
burst thy wind, if room enough! 


Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Antonio, 
Ferdinand, Gonzalo, and others. 

Alon. Good Boatswain, have care. Where’s 
the master? Play the men. 

Boats. I pray now, keep below. 

Ant. Where is the master, Boatswain? 

Boats. Do you not hear him? You mar 
our labour; keep your cabins: you do assist 
the storm. 

Gon. Nay, good, he patient. 

Boats. When the sea is. Hence! What 
care these roarers for the name of king? To 
cabin, silence: trouble us not. 

Gon. Good; yet remember whom thou hast 
aboard. 

Boats. None that I more love than myself. 



THE TEMPEST 


[act 1. 


Toti are a counsellor: if you can command 
these elements to silence, and work the peace 
of the present, we will not hand a rope more, 
use your authority. If you cannot, give thanks 
you have lived so long, and make yourself 
ready m your cabin for the mischance of the 
hour, if it so hap.— -Cheerly, good hearts.— 
Out of our way, I say. [Exit. 

Gon. I have great comfort from this fellow, 
methinks he hath no drowmng mark upon him; 
his complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, 
good fate, to his hanging I make the rope of 
his destiny our cable, for our own doth little 
advantage! If he be not born to be hanged, 
our case is miserable. [Ex&unt. 

, Re-enter Boatswain. 

Boats. Down with the top-mast; yare; 
lower, -lower; bring her to try with main- 
course. U cry within.] A plague upon this 
howling! They are louder than the weather, 
or our office.— 

Re-enter Sebastian, Antonio, and Gonzalo 
Yet again? What do you here? Shall we ^ve 
o^er, arid drown? Have you a mind to sink? 

Seb. A pox 0 * your throat! you bawling, 
blasphemous, incharitable dog! 

Boats. Work you, then. 

Ant. Hang, cur, hang! you whoreson, in- 
solent noise-maker, we are less afraid to be 
drowned than thou art. 

Gon. rU warrant him from drowmng; 

. though the ship were no stronger than a nut- 
shell, and as leaky as an unstanch’d wench. 

Boats. Lay her a-hold, a-hold: set her two 
courses; off to sea again, lay her off, 

£nfer Mariners, wet. 

Mar. All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all 
lost! • [Exeunt. 

Boats. What, must our mouths be cold? 

Gon. The king and prince at prayers! let us 
assist them, 

For our case is as theirs. 

Seb. I am out of patience, [drunkards. — 

Ant, We are merely cheated of our lives by 
This wide-chapp’d rascal;— Would thou 

mightst lie drowning, 

The washing of ten tides! 

Gon. He’ll be hanged yet; 

Though every drop of water swear against it, 
And gape at wid’st to glut him. 

[A confused noise within .] — Mercy on us! We 
spEt, we split!— Farewell, my wife and children! 
Farewell, brother!— We split, we split, we 
split!— 

Ant Ijct’s all sink with th^ king. [Exit 
- Seb. Let’s take leave , of him. [Exit 

Gon. How would X give a thousand furlongs 
of sea for an acre of barren ground; long heath, 
brown furze, any .thing; The wills above be 
done! but I would fkin die a dry death. [Exit 

Scene IL— The Island; before the Cell of 
Prospero. 

. Enter ProSpero and Miranda. 

Mra. If by youf art, my dearest father, you 
have 

,Put the wild Waters in this roar, allay them: 


The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking 
pitch, 

But that the sea, mounting to the welkin’s 
cheek, 

Dashes the fire out. 0, 1 have suffer’d 
With those that I saw suffer! a brave vessel, 
Who had, no doubt, some noble creatures in her, 
Dash’d ail to pieces. 0, the cry did Icnock 
Against my very heart! poor souls! they 
perish’d. 

Had I been any god of power, I would 
Have sunk the sea within the earth, or e’er 
It should the good ship so have swallowed, and 
The freighting souls within her. 

Pro. Be collected , 

No more amazement; tell your piteous heart, 
There’s no harm done. 

Mira. 0, woe the day! 

Pro. No harm. 

I have done nothing but in care of thee, ' 

(Of thee, my dear one’ thee, my daughter!) who 
Art ignorant of what thou art, nought knowing 
Of whence I am; nor that I am more better 
Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell, 

And thy no greater father. 

Mira. More to know 

Did never meddle with my thoughts. 

Pro. ’Tis time 

I should inform thee further. Lend thy hand, 
And pluck my magic garment from me.- So, 
[Lays down his mantle. 
Lie there my art. — Wipe thou thine eyes; have 
coriifort. 

The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch’d 
The very virtue of compa.‘5Sion m thee, 

I have with such provision m mine ait 
So safely order’d, that there is no soul — 

No, not so much perdition as an hair, 

Betid to any creature m the vessel 
Which thou heard’st cry, which thou saw’st 
sink. Sit down; 

For thou must now know further. 

Mirc. You have often 

Begun to tell me what I am; but stopp’d, 

And left me to a bootless inquisition; 
Concluding, Stay, not yet, - 
JFJfo. The hour’s now come; 

The very minute bids thee ope thine ear; 
Obey, and be attentive. Canst thou remember 
A time before we came unto this cell? [not 
I do not think thou canst; for then thou wast 
Out three years old. 

Mira. Certainly, sir, I can. 

Pro. By what? by any other house, or person? 
Of any thing the image tell me, that 
Hath kept with thy remembrance. 

Mira. ’Tis far off; 

And rather like a dream than an assurance 
That my remembrance warrants; Had I not 
Four or five women once, that tended me?‘ 
,Pro. Thou hadst, and more, Miranda: But 
how is it, [else 

That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou 
In the dark backward and abysm of time? 

If thou remember’st aught, ere thou cam’st here, 
How thou cam’st here, thou mayst. 

Mira. But that I do not. 

Pro. Twelve years since, Miranda, twelve 
years since, 



SCENE n.l 


THE TEMPEST 


Thy father was the Duke of Milan, and 
A pnnce of power. 

Jkfira. Sir, are not you my father? 

Pro* Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and 
She said— thou wast my daughter; and thy 
father 

Was Duke of Milan; and his only heir 
A princess; no worse issued. 

Mira. O, the heavens! 

What foul play had we that we came from thence; 
Or blessed was’t, we did? 

Pro. Both, both, my girl; 

By foul play as thou say’st, were we heaved 
thence; 

But blessedly holp hither. 

Mira. 0, my heart bleeds 

To think o^ the teen that I have turn’d you to, 
Which is from my remembrance 1 Please, you, 
further. 

Pro. My brother, and thy uncle, call’d 
Antonio — 

I pray thee, mark me,— that a brother should 
Be so perfi^ous! — he whom, next thyself. 

Of all the world I loved, and to him put 
The manage of my state; as, at that time, 
Through all the signiories it was the first. 

And Prospeio the prime duke; being so reputed 
In dignity, and, for the liberal arts, 

Without a parallel: those being all my study. 
The government I cast upon my brother. 

And to my state grew stranger, beingtransported 
And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle— 
Dost thou attend me? 

Mira, Sir, most heedfuUy* 

Pro. Being once perfected how to grant suits, 
Blow to deny them; whom to advance, and 
whom 

To trash for over-topping; new created 
The creatures that were mine; I say, or chang’d 
them, 

Or else new form’d them; having both the key 
Of officer and office, set all hearts 
To what tune pleased his ear; that now he was 
The ivy, which had hid my princely trunk. 

And suck’d my verdure out on’t. — Thou 
attead'st not; 

I pray thee, mark me. 

Mira, 0 good sir, I do. [dedicate 
Pro, I thus neglecting worldly ends, all 
To closeness, and the bettering of my mind 
With that, Which, but by being so retired, 
O’er-prireid all popular rate, in my false brother 
Awaked an evil nature: and my trust, 

Like a good parent, did beget of him 
A falsehood, in its contrary as great 
As my trust was; which had, indeed, no limit, 
A confidence sans bound. He being thus 
lorded, 

Hot only with what my revenue yielded, 

But what my power might else exact,— hke one, 
Who having, unto tcum, by telling of it, 

Made such a sinner of Ms memory, 

To credit Ms own lie,— he did believe 
He was the duke; out of the substitution, 

And executing the outward face of royal^, 
With all prerogative;— Hence Ms ambition 
Growing;, — Dost hear? 

Mira. Your tale, dr, would cure deafness. 
Pro* To have no screen between tMs part he 
ifiay^d 


And him he play’d it for, he needs will be 
Absolute Milan: Me, poor man! — ^my hbrary 
Wasdukedomlargeenough;oftemporalroyalties 
He thinks me now incapable: confederates 
(So dry he was for sway) with the king of Naples, 
To give him annual tribute, do him homage; 
Subject his coronet to Ms crown, and bend 
The dukedom, yet unbowed, (alas, poor Milan !> 
To most ignoble stooping. ,* 

Mira. 0 the heavens! ' 

Pro. ' Mark his condition, and the event; then 
If tMs might be a brother. Itell me, 

Mira. I should sin 

To think but nobly of my grandmother: 

Good wombs have home bad sons. 

Pro. , Now the condition. 

This king of Naples being an enemy 
To me inveterate, hearkens my brother’s suit; 
Which was that he in lieu o’ the premises, — 
Of homage, and I know not how much tribute, — 
Should presently extirpate me and mine 
Out of the dukedom; and confer fair Milan, 
With all the honours, on my brother: Whereon, 
A treacherous army levied, one midnight 
Fated to the purpose, did- Antonio open 
The gates of Milan; andi’ the dead of darkness, 
The ministers for the purpose hurried thence 
Me, and thy crying self. 

Mira. Alack, for pity! 

1, not rememb’ring how I cried out then. 

Will cry it o’er again: it is a hint, 

That wrings mine eyes to *t 
Pro. Hear a little further, 

And then I'll bring thee to the present business 
WMch now’s upon us; without the whic. this 
Were most impertinent. [story 

Mira, Wherefore did they not, 

That hour, destroy us? 

Pro. Well demanded, wench; 

My tale provokes that question. Dear, 'they 
durst not; 

(So dear the love my people bore me) nor set 
A mark so blbody on the business; but 
With colours fairer painted their foul ends. 

In few, they hurried us aboard a bark; 

Bore us some leagues to sea; where theyprepai’d 
A rotten carcass of a boat, not rigg’d, 

Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats 
Instinctively had quit it: there they hoist us, 
To cry to the sea tiiat roar’d to us; to sigh 
To the winds, whose pity, sigMng back again, 
Did us but loving wrong. 

Mira. Alack! what trouble 

Was I tihen to you! 

Pro. Ola cherubim ^ , 

Thou wast, that did preserve me 1 Thou didst 
smile, 

Infused with a fortitude from heaven, 

When I have deck’d the sea with drops full salt; 
Under my burden groan’d; which raised in me 
An undergoing stomach, to bear np • 

Against what should ensue. 

Mira. How came we ashore? 

Pro. By Providence divine. 

Some food we had, and some fresh water, that 
A noble Neapolitan, Gonralo, 

Out of his charity, (who being then appointed 
Master of this demgn,) did give ua; wth 
Bich garments, linens, utuffSi'and necessaries, 



THE TEMPEST 


[ACT 1. 


Which since have steaded much; so, of his 
gentleness, 

Knowing I loved my hooks, he furnish’d me, 
From my own library, with volumes that 
I prize above my dukedom. 

Mira, Would I might 

But ever see that man! 

Pro. ’ Now I arise: — 

Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow. 
Here in this island we arrived; and here 
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit 
Than other princes can, that have more time 
For vainer hours, and tutors not so careful. 
Mira, Heavens thank you f or’t I And now, 
I pray you, sir, 

(For still ’tis beating in my rDind,)your reason 
For raising this sea-storm> 

Pro. Know thus far forth. — 

By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune, 
Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies 
Brought to this shore: and by my prescience 
I find my zenith doth depend upon 
A most auspicious star; whose influence 
If now I court not, but omit, my fortunes 
Will ever after droop. — Here cease more ques- 
tions. 

Thou art inclin’d to sleep; ’tis a good dulness. 
And give itw ay;— I know thou canst not choose. 

[Miranda sleeps. 
Come away, servant, come: I am ready now; 
Approach, ray Ariel; come. 

Enter Ariel. 

[come 

Art. All hail, great master ! grave sir, haiU I 
To answer thy best pleasure; be’t to fly. 

To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride 

On the curl’d clouds; to thy strong bidding, task 

Ariel and all his quahty. 

Pro. Hast thou, spint, 

Perform’d to point the tempest that I bade thee? 

Art To every article. 

I boarded the king’s ship; now on the beak, 
Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin, 

I flamed amazement : Sometimes, I’d divide, 
And burn in many places; on the top-mast, 

The yards, and bowsprit, would I flame dis- 
tinctly, 

Then meet and join: Jove’s lightnings, the 
precursors 

O' the dreadful thunder-claps, more momentary 
And sight-out-running were not: The fire, and 
cracks 

Of sulphurous roaring, the most mighty N eptune 
Seem’d to besiege, and make his bold waves 
Yea, his dread trident shake. [tremble, 
Pro. My brave spirit ! 

Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil 
Would not infect his reason? 

Art Not a soul, 

But felt a fever of the mad, and play’d 
Some tricks of desperation: All, but mariners; 
Plung’d in the foaming brine, and quit the vessel, 
Then all afire with me : the king’s son, Ferdinand, 
With hair up-starmg (then like reeds, not hair), 
Was the first man that leap'd; cried# JTen is 
And all the devils are here! [empty ^ 

Pro. Why, that’s my spintl 

But was not this nigh shore? 

Ari. Close by, my master. 


Pro. But are they, Ariel, safe? 

Ari. Not a hair perish’d; 

On their sustaining garments not a blemish, 
Butfresherthan before: and, as thou bad’stme, 
In troops I have dispersed them ’bout the isle; 
The king’s son have Handed by himself; 
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs, 

In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting, 

His arms in this sad knot. 

Pro. Of the king’s ship. 

The mariners, say, how thou hast disposed, 
And all the rest o’ the fleet? 

Ari. Safely in harbour 

Is the king’s ship; in the deep nook, where once 
Thou call’dst me up at midnight to fetch dew 
From the still-vex’d Bermoothes, there she’s hid : 
The mariners all under hatches stow’d; 

Whom, with a charm join’d to their suffer’d 
labour, 

I have left asleep: and for the rest o’ the fleet, 
Which I dispersed, they all have met again; 
And are upon the Mediterranean flote, 

Bound sadly home for Naples; 

Supposing that they saw the king’s ship wreck’d, 
And his great person perish. 

Pro. Ariel, thy charge 

Exactly is performed; but there’s more work: 
What IS the time o’ the day? 

An. Past the mid season. 

Pro. At least two glasses: The time 'twixt 
SIX and now 

Must by us both be spent most preciously. 

An. Is there more toil? Since thou dost 
give me pams, 

Bet me remember thee what thou hast promis’d. 
Which IS not yet perform’d rne. 

Pro. How now? moody? 

What is’t thou canst demand? 

An. My liberty. 

Pro. Before the time be out? No more! 
Art. 1 pray thee 

Remember, I have done thee worthy service; 
Told thee no lies, made no mistakings, serv’d 
Without or grudge or grumblings: thou didst 
promise 

To bate me a full year. 

Pro. Dost thou forget 

From what a torment I did free thee? 

An. No. 

Pro. Thou dost; and think’st 
It much to tread the ooze of the salt deep; 
lo run upon the sharp wind of the north; 

To do me business m the veins o’ the earth, 
When it is bak’d with frost. 

Ari. I do not, sir. 

Pro. Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast 
thou forgot [envy, 

The foul witch, Sycorax, who, with age and 
Was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her? 
An. No, sir. 

Pro. Thou hast; Where was she 

bom? speak; tell me. 

Ari. Sir, in Argier. 

Pro. Oh, was she so? 1 must, 

Once in a month, recount what thou hast been, 
Which thou forget’st. This damn’d witch, 
Sycorax, 

For mischiefs manifold, and sorceries terrible 
To enter human hearing, from Argier, 



SCENE II.] 


THE TEMPEST 


TIiou know’st, was banished; for one thing 
she did, 

They would not take her life: Is not this true? 
An. Ay, sir. 

Pro. This blear-eyed hag was hither brought 
With child, [slave, 

And here was left by the sailors; Thou, my 
As thou report’s! thyself, wast then her servant: 
And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate 
To act her earthy and abhorr’d commands, 
Refusing her grand ’bests, she did confine thee, 
By help of her more potent nunistors, 

And in her most unimtigable rage. 

Into a cloven pine; within which rift 
Imprison’d, then didst painfully remain 
A dozen years; within which space she died. 
And left thee there: where thou didst vent thy 
groans, 

As fast as mill- wheels strike; Then was this 
island, 

(Save for the son that she did litter here, 

A freckled whelp, hag-born,) not honour'd with 
A human shape. 

Art Yes: Caliban her son. 

Pro. Dull tiling, I cay so; he, that Caliban, 
Whom now I ke ep m service. Thou best know’st 
What torment I did find thee in: thy groans 
Did make wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts 
Of over-angry bears; it was a torment 
To lay upon the damn’d, wliich Sycorax 
Could not again undo; it was mine art, 

When I arriv’d, and heard thee, that made gape 
The pine, and let thee out. 

Aru I thank thee, master 

Pro. If thou more murmur’st I will rend an 
And peg thee in his knotty entrails, till [oak. 
Thou hast howl’d away twelve winters. 

An, Pardon, master: 

I will be correspondent to command, 

And do my spntmg gently. 

Pro. Do so; and after two days 

I will discharge thee. 

Ari. That’s my noble master! 

What shall I do? say what? what shall I do? 
Fro. Go, make thyself like to a nymph o’ 
the sea; 

Be subject to no sight but mine; invisible 
To every eye-ball else. Go, take this shape 
And hither come in ’t; hence, with diligence. 

[Exit Ariel. 

Awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well; 
Awake ! 

Mira. The strangeness of your story put 
Heaviness m me. 

Pro. Shake it off; Come on; 

We’ll visit Caliban, my slave, who never 
Yields us kind answer. 

Miru. ’Tis a villain, sir, 

I do not love to look on. 

Fro. But, as ’tis, 

We cannot miss him: he does make our fire, 
Fetch in our wood; and serves m offices 
That profit us. What hoi slave! Caliban! 
Thou earth, thoul speak. ’ 

Cat fWif/im.! XhejMj’s wood enough within. 
Fro, Come forth, 1 say; there’s other busi- 
ness for thee; 

Come forth, thou tortoise i when? 


Re-enter Ariel, like a water-nymph* 

Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel, 

Hark in thine ear. 

Ari. My lord, it shall be done. [Fxif. 
Pro* Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil 
himself 

Upon thy wicked dam, come forth! 

Enter Caliban. 

Cat As wicked dew as e’er my mother 
brush’d 

With raven’s feather fiom unwholesome fen, 
Drop on you both! a south-west blow on ye, 
And bbster you all o’er. 

Pro* For this, be sure, to-night thou shalt 
have cramps, 

Side-stitches that shall pen Ihy breath up; 
urchins 

Shall, for that vast of night that they may work, 
All exercise on thee ; thou shalt be pinch’d 
As thick as honey-combs, each pinch more 
stinging 

Thaii bees that made them. 

Cat I must oat my dinner. 

This island’s mine, by Sycorax my mother, 
Which thou tak’st from me. When thou 
earnest first, 

Thou strok’dst me, and mad’st much of me; 
wouldst give me 

Water with berries in ’t; and teach me how 
To name the bigger light, and how the less, 
That burn by day and night: and then I lov’d 
thee, 

And shew’d thee all the qualities o’ the isle. 
The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place, and 
fertile; 

Cursed be I that did so! — All the charms 
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you! 
For I am all the subjects that you have, 

Which first was mine own king; and here you 
sty me 

In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me 
The rest of the island. 

Pro. Thou most lying slave, 

Whom stripes may move, not kindness: I have 
used thee, [thee 

Filth as thou art, with human care; and lodged 
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate 
The honour of my child. 

Cat O ho, 0 ho!— would it had been done! 
Thou didst prevent me; I had peopled else 
This isle with Calibans. 

Pro. Abhorred slave; 

Which any print of goodness will not take, 
Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee, 

Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee 
each hour [savage, 

One thing or other: when thou didst not, 
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble 
like 

A thing most brutish, I endow’d thy purposes 
With words that made them known: But thy 
vile race, [good natures 

Though thou (lids^ learn, had that in ’t which 
Could not abide to be with, therefore wast thou 
} Deservedly confined into this rock, 

Who hadst deserved more than a prison. 

Cat You taught me language; and my 
profit on ’t 



THE TEMPEST 


[act I. 


Is, I know kow to curse; the red plague rid you, 
Por learning me'your language! 

Pro. Hag-seed, hence! 

Fetch us in fuel; and he quick, thou wert best, 
To answer other business. Shrug’st thou, 
malice? 

If thou neglect’st, or dost unwillin^y 
What I command, I’ll rack thee with old cramps; 
Fin aU thy bones with aches; make thee roar, 
That beasts shall tremble at thy din. 

CaL No, pray thee! — 

I must obey: his art is of such power, [Aside, 
If woidd control my dam’s god, Setebos, 
ijid make a vassal of him. 

Pro. So, slave; hence! 

[Exit Caliban. 

Be-enter Ariel invisible, playing and singing; 
lEkDmM(J> following him. 

AMEL’S SONG. 

Come unto these yellow sands. 

And then take hands: 

Court’sied when you have, and kiss’d, 

(The wild waves whist,) 

Foot it f eatly here and there; 

' And sweet sprites, the burden bear. 

Hark, hark! 

Bur, Bowgh, wotogh, [Duperaedly. 

The watch-dogs bark: 

Bur, Bowgh, wowgh. [Dispersedltj. 

Hark, hark! 1 hear 
The stram of strutting chanticlere 
Cry, Cock-a-doodle-doo, 

Fer. Where should this music be? i’ the air, 
or the earth? 

It sounds no more: — and sure it waits upon 
Some god of the island. Sitting on a bank 
Weeping again the king my father’s wreck, 
•This music crept by me upon the waters; 
Allaying both their fury, and my passion, 

With its sweet air; thence I have follow’d it. 
Or it hath drawn me rather:— But ’tis gone. 
Ko, it begins again. 

Ariel sings. 

Full fathom five thy father lies ; 

Of his bones are coral made ; 

Those are pearls that were his eyes: 
Nothing of him that doth fade, 

But doth siSer a sea-chauge 
Into something nch and strange. 

• Sea-nymphs hourly rmg his knell: 

[Burden, dxng-dong. 

Harfcl now I hear them,— ding-dong bell. 
Per. The ditty does remember my drown’d 
father: — 

This is no mortal business, nor no sound 
That the earth owes: — I hear it now above me. 
Pro. The fringed curtains of thme eye 
advance, 

And say, what thou seest yond’. 

Mifa. What is ’t? a spirit? 

lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir, 

■It carries a brave form: — But ’tis a spirit. 

Pro. No, wench; it eats and sleeps, and 
hath such senses [seest, 

As we have, such: This gallant, which thou 
Was in the wreck: and but he’s something 
stain’d . [call him 

With ^ef , that’s beauty’s canker, thou might’st 
A goodly person: he hdthlost his fellows, 

And .strays about to find them. 

„ ikf^ra. I mi|d>tt call him 


A thing divine; for nothing natural 
I ever saw so noble. 

Pro. It goes on, Usidfe. 

As my soul prompts it: — Spirit, fine spint! I’ll 
free thee 

Within two days for this. 

Fer. • Most sure the goddess 

On whom these airs attend! — Vouchsafe, my 
prayer 

May know, if you remain upon this island; 
And that you will some good instruction give, 
How I may bear me here; My prime request, 
Which I do last pronounce, is, 0 you wonder! 
If you be maid or no? 

Mira. No wonder, sir; 

But certainly a maid. 

Fer. My language ! heavens I — 

I am the best of them that speak this speech, 
Were I but where ’tis spoken. 

Pro. How! the best? 

What wert thou, if the king of Naples heard thee? 

Fer. A single thing, as I am now, that wonders 
To hear thee speak of Naples: He does hear mq; 
And, that he does, I weep: myself am Naples; 
Who with mine eyes, ne’er since at ebb, beheld 
The long my father wreck’d. 

Mira. Alack, for mercy! 

Fer. Yes,faith, and all his lords'.the Duke of 
And his brave son, being twain. [Milan, 

Pro. The Duke of Milan, 

And his more braver daughter, could control 
thee, [Asiofe. 

If now ’twere fit to do’t:— At the first sight 
They have changed eyes: — Delicate Ariel, 

I’ll set thee free for this! — A word, good sir; 

I fear you have done yourself some wrong: a 
word. 

Afira. Why speaks my father so ungently? 
This 

Is the third man that e’er I saw; the first 
That e’er I sigh’d for: pity, move my father 
To be incKned my way! 

Fer. 0, if a virgin, 

And your affection not gone forth, FU make you 
The queen of Naples. 

Pro. Soft, sir; one word more. — 

They are both in either’s powers; but this swift 
business 

Imust uneasy make, lest too light winning [Asofe. 
Make the prize light.— One word more; I charge 
thee, 

That thou attend me; thou dost here usurp 
The name thou ow’st not; and hast put thyself 
Upon this island, as a spy, to win it * 

From me, the lord on’t. 

Fer. No, as I am a man. 

Mira. There’s nothing ill can dweilin such a 
If the ill spirit hive so fair an house, [temple; 
Good things will strive to dwell with’t. 

Pro. Follow me.— 

[To Fbrd, 

Speak not you for him; he’s a traitor.— Come. 
I’ll manacle thy neck and feet together; 
Sea-water sbalt thou drink; thy food shall be 
The fresh-brook muscles, wither’d roots, and 
husks 

Wherein the acorn cradled: Follow. 

Fer. No; 

I will resist such enterta&ment, till 

Mine enemy has more power. [He draws.. 



THE TEMPEST 


Mira. 0 dear father, 

Make not too rash a trial of him, for 
He’s gentle, and not fearful. 

Pro. What, I say, 

My foot my tutor! Put thy sword up, traitor; 
Who makest a show,* hut darest not strike, thy 
conscience 

Is so possess’d with guilt: come from thy ward; 
For I can here disarm thee with this stick, 

And make thy weapon drop, 
jkfzru. Beseech you, father! 

Pro. Hence; hang not on my garments. 
Mira. Sir, have pity; 

I’ll he his surety. 

Pro. Silence! one word more 

Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. 
What! 

An advocate for an imposter? hush! 

Xhou think’st there are no more such shapes 
as he, [wench! 

Having seen hut him and Caliban: Foohsh 
To the most of men this is a Cahhan, 

And they to him are angels. 

Mira. My affections 

Are then most humble; I have no ambition 
To see a goodlier man. 

Pro. Come on; obey: [To Ferd. 

Thy nerves are in their infancy again, 

And have no vigour in them. 

Per. So they are; 

My spirits, as in a dream, are all hound up. 
My father’s loss, the weakness which I feel. 
The wreck of all my friends, or this man’s 
threats. 

To whom 1 am subdued, are but light to me. 
Might I but through my prison once a day 
Behold this maid: all comers else o’ the earth 
Let Uberty make use of; space enough 
Have I, in such a prison. 

Pro. It works: — Come on. — 

Thou hast done well, fine Ariel I— Follow me, — 
[To Feed, and Mm. 
Hkrk, what thou else shalt do me. [To Ariel, 
Mira. Be of comfort; 

My father’s of a better nature, sir, 

Than he appears by speech; tlds is unwonted, 
Which now came from Mm. 

Pro. Thou shalt be as free 

As mountain winds: but then exactly do 
AJl points of my command. 

Ari. To the syllable. 

Pro. Come, follow: speak not for Mm. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT 11. 

Scene l.--~-Anofhor part of the Island. 

Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Antonio, 
Gonzalo, Aerian, Francisco, and others. 

Gon. Beseech you, sir, be merry: you have 
<So have we all) of joy; for our escape [cause 
Is much beyond our loss: Our Mnt of woe 
Is common; every day, some sailor’s “Wife, 

The masters of some merchant, and the 
merchant. 

Have just our theme of woe : but for the miracle, 
I mean our preservatioE, few in millions 
Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh 
Our sorrow with our comfort. 

AJon, Pr’ythee, peace. 


Seb. He receives comfort like cold porridge. 
Ant. The visitor will not give him o’er so. 
Seb. Look, he’s winding up the watch of his 
By and by it wiU strike. ' [wit; 

Gon. Sir, — . 

Seb, One, — TeH. [offer’d, 

Gon. When every grief is entertain’d, that’s 
Comes to the entertainer— 

Seb. A dollar. 

Gon. Dolour comes to him, indeed; you 
have spoken truer than you purposed, 

Seb. You have taken it wiselier than I meant 
you should. 

Gon. Therefore, my lord, — 

Ant. Fye, what a spendthrift is he of his 
tongue! 

Aton. I pr’ythee spare, 

Gon, Well, I have done; But yet— ■ 

Seb. He will be talking. 

Ant. WMch of them, he, or Adrian, for a 
good wager, first begins to crow? 

Seb. The old cock. 

Ant. The cockrel. 

Seb. Done : the wager? 

Ant. A laughter, 

Seb. A match. 

Adr. Though tMs island seem to be desert, — 
Seb. Ha, ha, ha! 

Ant. So, you’ve paid. [sible, — 

Adr, Uninhabitable, and almost inacces- 
Seb. Yet,— 

Adr. Yet,— 

Ant. He could not miss it.' 

Adr. It must needs be of subtile, tender, and 
delicate temperance. 

Ant. Temperance was a delicate wench. 
Seb. Ay, and a subtle ; as he most learnedly 
ddivered. [sweetly. 

Adr. The air breathes upon us here most 
Seb. As if it had lungs, and rotten oae^. 
Ant. Or, as ’twere perfumed by a feiv 
Gon. Hereis everytMng advantageous to life. 
Ant. True; save means to Hve. 

Seb. Of that there’s none, or little, [green! 
Gon. Howlushandlusty the grasslookslhow 
Ant. The ground, indeed, is tawny , 

Seb, With an eye of green in ’t. 

Ant. He misses not much. 

Seb. No; he doth but mistake the truth totally. 
Goru But the rarity of it is (which is indeed 
almost beyond credit)— 

Seb. As many vouch’d rarities are. 

Gon. That our garments, being, asthey were, 
drenched in the sea, hold, notwithstanding, their 
freshness and glosses; being rather new dyed, 
than stained with salt water. 

Ant If bnt one of fiis pockets could speak, 
would it not say, he lies? 

Seb. Ay, or v^ry falsely pocket up Ms report. 
Gon. Methinks, our garments are now as 
fresh as when we put them on first in Africk, 
at tile marriage of the king’s fair daughter 
Claribel to the king of Tunis. 

Seb. ’Twas a sweet marriage, and we pros* 
per well in our return. 

Adr. Tunis was never graced before with 
such a paragon to their queen. 

Gm. Not since widow Dido’s time. , 

Ant. Widow? a pox o’ that! Ho-^ came 
that widow in? Widow' Dido I 



8 


THE TEMPEST 


[act II. 


iSe&. What if he had said, widower jffineas 
too? £OOd lord, how you take it! 

Adr, Widow Dido, said you? you make me 
study of that: She was of Carthage, not of Tunis. 

Gon. This Tunis, sir, was Carthage. 

Adr, Carthage? 

Gon* 1 assure you, Carthage. [harp. 

Ant His word is more than the miraculous 

Seb, He hath raised the wail, and houses too* 

Ant What impossible matter will he make 
easy next? 

Seb. I think he will carry this island home in 
his pocket, and give it his son for an apple. 

Ant And, sowing the kernels of it in the 
sea, bring forth more islands. 

Gon. Ay? 

Ant Why, in good time. 

Gon, Sir, we were talking, that our garments 
seem now as fresh as when we were at Turns at 
the marriage of your daughter, who is now queen. 

Ant And the rarest that e’er came there. 

Seb. ’Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido. 

Ant. 0, widow Dido; ay, widow Dido. 

Gon. Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the 
first day I wore it? I mean, in a sort. 

Ant That sort was well fish’d for. 

Gon. When I wore it at your daughter’s 
marriage? [against 

Alon, You cram these words into mine ears, 
The stomach of my sense: Would I had never 
Mamed my daughter there ! for, coming thence, 
My son is lost; and, in my rate, she too, 

Who is so far from Italy removed, 

I ne’er again shall see her. O thou mine heir 
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish 
Hath made his meal on theel 

Fran. Sir, he may live; 

I saw him heat the surges under him, 

And ride upon their backs; he trod the water, 
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted 
The surge most swoln that met him; his bold 
head 

’Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar’d 
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke 
Totheshore,thato'erhis wave-worn basis bow’d, 
As stooping to relieve him; I not doubt 
He came alive to land. 

Alon. No, no, he’s gone. 

Seb. Sir, you may thank yourself for this 
great loss; [daughter, 

That would not bless our Europe with your 
But rather lose her to an African; 

Where she, at least, is banish’d from your eye, 
Who hath cause to wet the grief on ’t. 

' 4^?”* Pr’ythee, peace, 

Seb. You were kneel’d to, and importun’d 
otherwise 

By all of us; and the fair soul herself 
Weigh’d, between lothness and obedience, at 
Which end o’ the beam she’d bow. We have 
lost your son, 

I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have 
More widows in them of this business’ maldng, 
Than we bring men to comfort them: the fault’s 
Your own. 

Alon, So is the dearest of the loss. 

Gon, My lord Sebastian, 

The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness, 
Md time to speak it in; you rub the sore, 

When you should bring the plaster. 


Geb. Very well. 

Ant And most chirurgeonly. 

Gon, It is foul weather in us all, good sir, 
When you are cloudy. 

Seb. Foul weather? 

Ant Very foul. 

Gon. Had I a plantation of this isle, my lord, — 
Ant. He’d sow it with nettle-seed. 

Seb. Or docks, or mallows. 

Gon, And were the king of it, what would Ido? 
Seb. ’Scape being dmnk, for want of wine . 
Gon. I’ the commonwealth, I would by con- 
Execute all things: for no kind of traffic [traries 
Would I admit, no name of magistrate; 

Letters should not be known; no use of service, 
Of riches, or of poverty; no contracts, 
Successions; bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none : 
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil: 

No occupation; all men idle, all; 

And women too, but innocent and pure: 

No sovereignty.— 

Seb. And yet he would be king on ’t. 
j4nf. The latter end of his commonwealth 
forgets the beginning. [duce 

Gon. All things in common nature should pro- 
Without sweat or endeavour: treason, felony, 
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine, 
W ould I not have ; but nature should bring forth, 
Of its own kind, all foison, all abundance, 

To feed my innocent people. 

Seb. No marrying ’mong his subjects? 

Ant. None, man; all idle; whores and knaves. 
Gon. I would with such perfection govern, sir. 
To excel the golden age. 

Seb. Save his majesty. 

Ant. Long live Gonzalo! 

Gon. And, do you mark me, sir?- 

Alon. Pr’ythee, no more: thou dost* talk 
nothing to me. 

Gon. I do well believe your highness; and 
did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen, 
who are of such sensible and nimble lungs, that 
they always use to laugh at nothing. 

Ant ’Twas you we laugh’d at. 

Gon. Who, in this kind of merry fooling, am 
nothing to you: so you may continue, and 
laugh at nothing still. 

Ant What a blow was there given! 

Seb. An it had not fallen flat-long, 

Gon. Y ou are gentlemen of brave mettle; you 
would lift the moon out of her sphere, if she 
would continue m it five weeks without changing. 

Enter Ariel invisible, playing solemn musk. 

Seb. We would so, and then go a bat-fowHng. 
Ant. Nay, good my lord, be not angry. 

Gon. No, I warrant you; I will not adven- 
ture my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh 
me asleep, for I am very heavy? 

Ant. Go sleep, and hear us. 

[All sleep but ^ON. Seb. and km* 
Alon. What, all so soon asleep! I wish nriiie 
eyes [I find 

Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: 
They are inclined to do so. 

Seb* Please you, sir, 

Do not omit the heavy offer of it: 

It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth, 

It is a comforter. 



SCENE 1.1 


THE TEMPEST 


Ant. We two, my lord, 

Will guardyour person, wMle you take your rest. 
And watch your safety. 

Alon. Thank you: wondrous heavy - 

[Alonso sleeps. Exit Ariel. 
Seb. What a strange drowsiness possesses 
them? 

Ant. It is the quahty o’ the climate. 

Seb. Why 

Doth it not then our eyelids sink! I find not 
Myself disposed to sleep. 

Ant. Nor I; my spirits are ni mb le. 

They fell together all, as by consent; 

They dropp’d, as by a thunder-stroke. What 
might, [more: — 

Worthy Sebastian? — 0 what might? — No 

And yet, methinks, I see it in thy face, 

What thou shouldst be: the occasion speaks 
thee, and 

My strong imagination sees a crown 
Dropping upon thy head. 

Seb. What, art thou waking? 

Ant. Do you not hear me speak? 

Seb. I do; and, surely, 

It is a sleepy language; and thou speak’ st 
Out of thy sleep: What is it thou didst say? 
This is a strange repose, to be asleep [ing, 
With eyes wide open, standing, speaking, mov- 
And yet so fast asleep. 

Ant Noble Sebastian, [wink’st 

Thou lett’st thy fortune sleep — die rather. 
Whiles thou art waking. 

Seb. Thou dost snore distinctly; 

There’s meaning in thy snores. 

Ant. I am more serious than my custom: you 
Must be so too, if heed me, which to do 
Trebles thee o’er. 

Seb. Well, I am standing water. 

Ant. I’ll teach you how to flow. 

Seb. Do so: to ebb, 

Hereditary sloth instructs me. 

Ant 0, 

If you but knew, how you the purpose cherish, 
Wlules thus you mock it! how, in stripping it, 
You more mvest it! Ebbing men, indeed. 
Most often do so near the bottom run. 

By their own fear, or sloth. 

Seb. Pr’ythee, say on: 

The setting of thine eye, and cheek, proclaim 
A matter from thee; and a birth, indeed. 
Which throes thee much to yield. 

Ant. Thus, sir: 

Although this lord of weak remembrance, this. 
Who shall be of as little memory 
When he is earth’d, hath here almost persuaded 
(For he’s a spirit of persuasion only) 

The Mng, his son’s alive: ’tis as impossible 
That he’s uudrown’d as he that sleeps here 
iSeb. I have no hope [swims 

That he’s undrown’d. 

Ant 0, out of that no hope. 

What great hope have you! no hope, that way, is 
Another way so high an hope, that even 
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond, 

But doubts discovery there. Will you grant, 
with me. 

That Ferdinand is drown’d? 

Seb. He’s gone. 

Ant Then, tell jne, 

Who’s the next heir of Naples? 


Seb. Claribel. 

Ant She that is queen of Tunis: she that 
dwells 

Ten leagues beyond man’s life, she that from 
Naples 

Can have no note, unless the sun were post 
(The man i’ the moon’s too slow,) till new-born 
Be rough and razorable; she, from whom [chms 
We were all sea-swallow’d, though some cast 
again; 

And, hy that, destined to perform an act, 
Whereof what’s past is prologue; what to come, 
In yours and my discharge. 

iScb. What stuff is this? — How say you? 

’Tis true, my brother’s daughter’s queen of 
Turns* 

So is she heir of Naples; ’twixt which regions 
There is some space. 

Ant A space whose every cubit 

Seems to cry out, How shall that Claribel 
Measure usback to Naples? — Keepm Turns, 
And let Sebastian wake! — Say, this were death 
That now hath seized them; why, they were 
no worse 

Than now they are: There be, that can rule 
Naples, 

As well as he that sleeps; lords, that can prate 
As amply and unnecessarily 
As this Gonzalo; I myself could make 
A chough of as deep chat. O, that you bore 
The mind that I do! what a sleep were this 
For your advancement ! Do you understand me? 
Seb Methinks, I do. 

Ant And how does your content 

Tender your own good fortune? 

Seb. I remember, 

You did supplant your brother Prospeio. 

Ant True: 

And, look, how well my garments sit upon me; 
Much f eater than before: My brother’s servants 
Were then my fellows, now they are my men. 
Seb. But, for your conscience— 

Ant Ay, sir; where lies that? if it were a 
kybe, 

’Twould put me to my slipper: But I feel not 
This deity in my bosom; twenty consciences, 
That stand ’twixt me and Milan, candied be 
they, [brother, 

And melt, ere they molest! Here lies your 
No better than the earth he lies upon, 

If he were that which now he’s hfce* whom I, 
With this obedient steel, three inches of it, 

Can lay to bed for ever: whiles you, doing thus 
To the perpetual wmk for aye might put 
This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who 
Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest, 
They’ll take suggestion, as a cat laps milk; 
They’ll tell the clock to any business that 
We say befits the hour. 

Seb. Thy case, dear friend. 

Shall be my precedent; as thou gott’st Milan, 
I’ll 'come by Naples. Draw thy sword: one 
stroke [pay’st; 

Shall free thee from the tribute which thou 
And I the king shall love thee. 

Ant Draw together: 

And when 1 rear my hand, do you the like, 

To fall it on Gonzalo. 

Seb. O, but one word. 

[Theif converse apart 



THE TEMPEST 


Iactil 


Music. Re-^nter Ariel, invisible. 

Ari. Mjr master tjiroiigji his art forsees the 
danger {forth, — 

That these his friends, are in; and sends me 
Por else his project dies, — to keep the living. 

[Sinfirs in Gonzalo's ear. 

While you here do snoring he. 

Open-eyed conspiracy 
His time doth take : 

If of life you keep a care, 

Shake off slumber, and beware: 

Awake! Awake! 

Ant Then let us both be sudden. 

Gon. Now, good angels, preserve the king! 

[They awake. 

Alon. Why, how now, hoi awake! Why 
are you drawn? 

Wherefore this ghastly looking? 

Gon. What’s the matter? 

Seh. Whiles we stood here securing your 
repose, 

Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing 
Like bulls, or rather Hons; did it not wake you? 
It struck mine ear most terribly. 

Alon. 1 heard nothing. 

'Ant O, ’twas a din to fright a monster’s ear; 
To make an earthquake I sure it was the roar 
Of a whole herd of Hons. 

Alon. Heard you this, Gonzalo? 

Gon. TJpon mne honour, sir, I heard a 
humming, [me: 

And that a strange one too, which did awake 
I shaked you, sir, and cried; as mine eyes 
open’d, 

I saw their weapons drawn:— -there was a noise, 
That’s verity:/Best stand upon our guard; 

Or that we quit this place: let’s draw our 
weapons. [further search 

Alom lead off this ground; and let’s make 
For my poor son. 

Gon. Heavens keep him from these beasts! 
Eor he is, sure, i’ the island. 

Alon. Lead away. 

Ari. Prospero my lord shall know what I 
have done: [Aswic. 

So, king, go safely on to seek thy son. [Exeunt 

Scene II. — Another part of the Island. 

Enter Caliban, with a burden of wood. 

A noise of thunder heard. 

Cat All the infections that the sun sucks up 
From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall, and 
make him 

By inch-meal a disease! His spirits hear me, 
And yet I needs must curse, But they’ll nor 
pinch, [mire, 

Flight me wim urchin-shows, pitch me i’ the 
Nor lead me, Hke a firebrand, in the dark ; 
Out of my way, unless he bid them; but , 
For every trifle they are set upon me : ! 

Sometime Hke apes, that moe and chatter at me, 
And after, bite me; then Hke hedge-hogs, which 
Lie tumbling in my bare-foot way, and mount ' 
Their pricks at my foot-faH; sometimie am I ' 
All wound with adders, who, with cloven 
tongues, 

Do hiss me into madness: — Lo! now! lo! 


Enter Trincdlo. 

Here comes a spirit of Ms; and to torment me, 
For bringing wood in slowly: I’ll faU flat; 
Perchance he will not mind me. 

Trin. Here’s neither bush nor shrub, to bear 
off any weather at aU, and another storm brew- 
ing; I hear it sing i’ the wind; yond same 
black cloud, yond huge one, looks Hke a foul 
bumbard that would shed Ms Hquor. If it 
should thunder, as it did before, I know not 
where to Mde my head: yond same cloud can- 
not choose but fall by pailfuls. — What have we 
here? a man or a fish? dead or aHve? A fish: 
he smells Hke a fish: a very ancient and fish- 
hke smeH; a kind of, not of the newest, Poor- 
John. A strange fish! Were I m England 
now (as once I was), and had but this fish 
painted, not a hoHday fool there but would give 
a piece of silver: there would tMs monster 
make a man; any strange beast there makes a 
man: when they will not give a doit to reheve 
a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a 
dead Indian. Legg’d hke a man! and Ms fins 
Hke arms! Warm, o’ my troth! I do now 
let loose my opimon, hold it no longer; this is 
no fish, but an islander, that hath lately suffered 
by a thunder-bolt. [Thunder.] AJas! the 
storm is come again: my best way is to creep 
under his gaber^e; there is no other shelter 
hereabout: Misery acquaints a man wi^ 
strange bedfeUows. I will here shroud, tiU 
the dregs of the storm be past. 

Enter Stephano singing; a bottle in his hand. 
Sie. 1 shall no more to sea, to sea, 

Here shall I die ashore; — 

TMs i« a very scurvy tune to sing at a man’s 
funeral: Well, here’s my comfort. [Drinks. 

The master, the swabber, thO boatswain, and I, 
The gunner, and his mate, 

Lov’d Mall, Meg, and Mariam and Margery, 

But none of us car’d for Kate: * 

For she had a tongue with a tang, 

Would cry to a sailor, Go, hangi 
She lov’d not the savour of far nor of pitch. 

Yet a tailor might scratch her where’er she did itch : 
Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang. 

TMs is a scurvy tune too: But here’s my 
comfort. [Drinks. 

Cal. Do not torment me; Oh! 

Ste. What’s the matter? Have we devils 
here? Do you put tricks upon us with savages, 
and men of Inde? Ha! I have not ’scaped 
drowning, to be afeard now of your four legs; 
for it hath been said, As proper a man as ever 
went on four legs cannot make Mm give ground: 
and it shall be said so again, while Stephano 
breathes at nostrils- 
Cal. The spirit torments me; Oh I 
Ste. TMs is some monster of the Me, with 
four legs: who hath got, as I take it, an ague: 
Where the devH should he learn our language? 
I will give Mm some relief, if it be but for that: 
If I can recover him, and keep Mm tame, and 
get to Naples with Mm, he’s a present for any 
emperor that ever trod on neat’s leather. ’ 

Cat Do not torment me, pr’ytheej 
I’U bring my wood home faster. 

Ste. He’s in Ms fit now; and does not talk 
after the wisest. He shall taste of my bottle: 



SCEKE II.] 


THE TEMPEST 


if he have never drank wine afore, it will go 
near to remove his fit. If I can recover him, 
and keep him tame, I will not take too much 
for him: he shall pay for him that hath him, 
and that soundly. [wilt 

Cal. Thou dost me yet but little hurt; thou 
Anon; I know it by thy trembling; 

Now Prosper works upon thee. 

Ste. Come on your ways; open your mouth: 
here is that which will give language to you, 
cat; open your mouth: this will shake your shak- 
ing, I can tell you, and that soundly: you cannot 
tell who’s your friend: open your chaps again. 

Trm. 1 should know that voice: It should 
be — But he is drowned; and these are devils: 
Oh r defend me! — 

Ste. Four legs and two voices; a most deli- 
cate monster! His forward voice now is to 
speak well of his friend; his backward voice is 
to utter foul speeches, and to detract. If all 
the wine in my bottle will recover him, I will 
help his ague: Come — Amen! 1 will pour some 
in thy other mouth. 

Trin. Stephano, — 

Ste. Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy! 
mercy! This is a devil, and no monster: I 
will leave him; I have no long spoon. 

Trin. Stephano! — if thou beest Stephano, 
touch me, and speak to me; for I am Trinculo; 
—be not afeard,— thy good friend Trmculo. 

Ste. If thou beest Trinculo, come forth; I’ll 
pull thee by the lesser legs: if any be Trinculo’s 
legs, these are they. Thou art very Trmculo 
indeed: How cam’st thou to be the siege of 
this moon-calf? Can he vent Trinculos? 

Trin. I took him to be killed with a thunder- 
stroke: — But art thou not drowned, Stephano? 
I hope, now, thou art not drowned. Is the 
storm over-blown? I hid me under the dead 
moon-calf’s gaberdine for fear of the storm. 
And art thou living, Stephano? O Stephano, 
two Neapolitans ’scaped! 

Ste. Pr’ythee, do not turn me about; my 
stomach is not constant. [sprites. 

Cal. These be fine things, and if they be not 
That’s a brave god, and bears celestial liquor: 
I will kneel to him. 

Ste. How didst thou ’scape? how cam’st 
thou hither? swear by this bottle, how thou 
cam’st hither. I escaped upon a butt of sack, 
which the sailors heaved overboard, by this 
bottte! which 1 made of the bark of a tree, 
with mine own hands, since I was cast ashore. 

Cal. I’E swear, upon that bottle, to be thy 
True subject; for the liquor is not earthly. 

Ste, Here; swear then how thou escap’dst. 

Trin, Swam ashore, man, like a duck; I 
can swim like a duck, I’ll be sworn. 

Ste. Here, Mss the book: Though thou 
canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a 
goose. 

Trin. 0 Stephano, hast any more of this? 

Ste. The whole butt, man; my cellar is in a 
rock by the sea-side, where my wine is hid. 
How now, moon-calf? how does thine ague? 

Cal, Hast thou not droimed from heaven? 

Ste. Out o’ the moon, I do assure thee: I 
was the man i’ the moon, when time was. 

Cal, I have seen thee in her, and I do adore 
thee; 

D ' 


My mistress showed me thee, and thy dog and 
bush. 

Ste. Come, swear to that; kiss the book: I 
will ^nish it anon with new contents: swear. 

Trin. By this good hght, this is a very shal- 
low monster: — I afeard of him? a very weak 
monster; — The mani’ the moon!— a most poor 
credulous monster: Well drawn, monster, in 
good sooth. 

Cal, I’ll show thee every fertile inch o’ the 
island; 

And kiss thy foot: I pr’ythee, be my god. 

Trin. By this light, a most perfidious and 
drunken monster; when his god’s asleep, he’ll 
rob his bottle. 

Cal. I’ll kiss thy foot: I’ll swear myself thy 
subject. 

Ste. Come on, then; down, and swear. 

Trin. I shall laugh myself to death at this 
puppy-headed monster: a most scurvy monster! 
I could find in my heart to beat him, — 

Ste. Come, kiss. 

Trin. — but that the poor monster’s m drink. 
An abominable monster! 

Cal. I’ll show thee the best springs; I’ll 
pluck thee berries; 

I’ll fish for thee, and get thee wood enough. 

A plague upon the tyrant that I serve! 

I’ll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee. 
Thou wondrous man. 

Trin. A most ridiculous monster! to make 
a wonder of a poor drunkard. 

Cal. I pr’y^ee, let me bring thee where 
crabs grow; 

And I with my long nails will dig thee pig-nuts, 
Show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how 
To snare the mmble marmozet; I’ll bring thee 
To clust’ring Mberts, and sometimes I’ll get 
thee / 

Young sea-mells from the rock: Wilt thou go 
with me? 

Ste. I pr’ythee now lead the way, without 
any more talking. — Trinculo, the king and all 
oui company else being drowned, we will in- 
herit here.— Here; [To Cal.] bear my bottle. 
Fellow Trmculo, we’ll fill him by and by again. 
Cal. Farewell, master; farewell, farewell. 

[Sings drunkenly. 
Trin. A howling monster; a drunken monster 
Cal. No more dams Pit make for fish; 

Nor fetch m firing 
At requiring. 

Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish; 

*Ban 'Ban, Ca— Caliban, 

Has a new master— Cef a new man. 
Freedom, hey-day! hey-day, freedom! freedom, 
hey-day, freedom! 

Ste. 0 brave monster! lead the way [Exeunt. 
ACT III. 

Scene I.— Be/orc Prospero’s Cell* 
Enter Ferdinanii, hearing a log. 

Fer. There be some sports are painful, and 
their labour 

Delight in them sets ofi: some kinds of baseness 
Are nobly undergone; and most poor matters 
Point to rich gods. This my mean task would 
be 

As heavy to me, as ’tis odious; but 



THE TEMPEST [act hi. 


The mistress which I serve quickens what^s 
dead, 

And makes my labours pleasures: Oh, she is 
Ten times more gentle than her father’s 
crabbed; 

And he’s composed of harshness. Imustremove 
Some thousands of these logs, and pile them up, 
Upon a sore injunction. My sweet mistress 
Weeps when she sees me work; and says such 
baseness 

Had never hke executor. I forget: [labours, 
But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my 
Most busy, least when I do it. 

Enter Miranda, and Prospero at a distance, 

Mira. Alas, now! pray you. 

Work not so hard: I would the lightning had 
Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin’d to pile ' 
Pray, set it down, and rest you: when this bums, 
’ Twill we ep for having weaned you. My father 
Is hard at study; pray, now, rest yourself; 

He’s safe for these three hours, 

Fer. O most dear mistress, 

The sun will set before I shall discharge 
What I must stnve to do. 

Mira. If you’ll sit down, 

I’U bear your logs the while: pray, give me that, 
I’ll carry it to the pile. 

Fer. No, precious creature: 

I had rather crack my sinews, break my back, 
Than you should such dishonour undergo, 
While I sit lazy by. 

Mira. It would become me 

As well as it does you: and I should do it 
With much more ease; for my good will is to it, 
And yours agamst. 

Pro. [Aside.] Poor worm! thou art infected; 
This visitation shows it. 

Mira. You look weainly, 

Fer. No, noble mistress; ’tis fresh morning 
with me 

When you are by at mght. 1 4o beseech you, 
Chiefly that I imght set in my prayers, 

What is your name? 

Mira. Miranda :--0 my father,* 

I have broke your ’hest to say sol 
Fer. Admir’d Miranda! 

Indeed the top of admiration; worth 
What’s dearest to the world! Full many a lady 
I have eyed with best regard; and many a time 
The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage 
Brought my too diligent ear: for several virtues 
Have I lik’d several women: never any 
With so full soul, but some defect in her 
Bid quarrel with the noblest grace she owed, 
And put it to the foil: but you, 0 you, 

So perfect and so peerless, are created 
Of every creature’s best. 

Mtra. I do not know 

One of my sex! no woman's face remember, 
Save, from my glass, mine own; nor have I seen 
More that I may call men, than you, good 
friend, 

And my dear father: how features are abroad, 
I am skill-less of; but, by my modesty, — 

The jewel in my dower,— I would not wish 
Any companion in the world but you; 

Nor can imagination form a shape, 

Besides yourself, to like of. But I prattle 


Something too wildly, and my father’s precepts 
Therein forget. ^ 

Fer. 1 am, in my condition, 

A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king, — 

I would, not so! — and would no more endure 
This wooden slavery than I would suffer 
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul 
speak: 

The very instant that I saw you, did 
My heart fly to your service; there resides, 

To make me slave to it; and for your sake 
Am I this patient log-man. 

Mira. Do you love me? 

Fer. O heaven, 0 earth, bear witness to this 
sound, 

And crown what I profess with kind event. 

If I speak true! if hollowly, invert 
What best is boded me to mischief! I, 
Beyond all limit of what else i* the world, 

Do love, prize, honour you. 

Mira. 1 am a fool 

To weep at what I am glad of. 

Pro. [Aside.] Fair encounter 

Of two most rare affections ! Heavens ram grace 
On that which breeds between them! 

Fer. Wherefore weep you? 

Mira. At mine unworthiness, that dare not 
offer 

What I desire to give; and much less take 
What I shall die to want. But this is trifling; 
And all the more it seeks to hide itself, [cunning; 
The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful 
And prompt me, plain and holy innocence! 

I am your wife, if you will marry me; 

If not, I’U die your maid: to be your feUow 
You may deny me; but I’ll be your servant 
Whether you will or no. 

Fer, My mistress, dearest. 

And I thus humble ever. 

Mira. My husband, then? 

Fer. Ay, with a heart as willing 
As bondage e’er of freedom: here’s my hand, 
Mira, ^d mine, with my heart in ’t: and 
now fareweU 
Till half an hour hence. 

Fer. A thousand! thousand! 

[Exeunt Ferd. and Mira. 
Pro. So glad of this as they I cannot be, 
Who are surpnsed withal; but my rejoicing 
At nothing can be more. I’U to my book; 

For yet, ere supper time, must I perform 
Much business appertainmg. 

Scene II.— Another J>art of the Island. 

Enter Stephano and Trincxilo; Caliban 
following with a bottle. 

Ste. Tell not me;— when the butt is out, we 
will drink water; not a drop before: therefore 
bear up, and board ’em: Servant-monster, 
drink to me, 

Trin. Servant-monster! the foUy of this 
island! They sty there’s but five upon tMs 
isle; we are three of them; if the other two be 
brained like us, the state totters. 

Ste. Drink, servant-monster, when I bid 
thee; thy eyes are almost set in thy head, 

Trin. Where should they bo set else? he 
were a brave monster indeed, if they were set 
in his tail. 



THE TEMPEST 


13 


Ste* My man-monster hath drowned his 
tongue in sack: for my part, the sea cannot 
(^own me: I swam, ere I could recover the 
shore, five-and-thirty leagues, off and on, by 
this light. — Thou shdt he my lieutenant, mon- 
ster, or my standard. [standard. 

Trin, Your lieutenant, il you list; he’s no 

Ste. We’ll not run, monsieur-monster. 

2Wn. Nor go neither: hut you’ll lie, like 
dogs; and yet say nothing neither. 

Ste. Moon-call, speak once in thy life, if thou 
beest agood moon-calf. 

CaL How does thy honour? Let me lick 
thy shoe. 

PU not serve him; he is not valiant. 

Trin, Thou liest, most ignorant monster: I 
am in case to justle a constable. Why, thou 
deboshed fish thou, was there ever a man a 
coward that hath drunk so much sack as I to- 
day? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being 
but half a fish and half a monster? 

Cal Lo, how he mocks me! wilt thou let 
him, my lord? 

Trin. Lord, quoth he! — ^that a monster 
should be such a natural! 

Cal Lo, lo again! bite him to death, I 
pr*ythee. 

Ste. Tiincxdo, keep a good tongue in your 
head: if you prove a mutineer, the next tree. — 
The poor monster’s my subject, and he shall 
not suffer indignity. 

Cal 1 thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be 
pleased to hearken once again to the suit I 
made thee? 

Ste. Marry will I: kneel and repeat it; I 
will stand, and so shall Trinculo. 

Bnter Awel, invisible. 

Cal. As 1 told thee before, I am subject to a 
tyrant; a sorcerer, that by his cunning hath 
cheated me of this island. 

Ari. Thou liest. 

Cal Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou; 
I would my valiant master would destroy thee! 
I do not lie. 

Ste. Trinculo, if you trouble him any more 
in his tale, by this hand, I will supplant some 
of your teeth. 

Trin. Why, I said nothing. 

Ste. Mum, then, andnomore. — [ToCALiBAir.] 
Proceed. 

Cal, I say, by sorcery ho got this isle; 

From me he got it. If thy greatness will 
Revenge it on him— for 1 know thou dar’st, 
But this thing dare not. 

Ste That’s most certain. 

Cal Thou shalt be lord of it^ and I’ll serve thee. 

Ste, How now shall this be compassed? 
Canst thou bring me to tbe party? [asleep, 

CaL Yea, yea my lord; I’U jdeld him thee 
Where thou mayst knock a nail Into his head. 

Ari. Thou liest; thou canst noL [patch! — 

Col. What a pied ninny’s this? Thou scurvy 
I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows, 
And take his botfie from Mm: when that’s gone 
He shall drink nought but brine; for I’U not 
show him 

Where the quick freshes are. 

Ste. Trinculo, run into no farther danger! 
interrupt the monster one word further, and, 


by this hand, I’U turn my mercy out of doors, 
and make a stock-fish of thee. 

Trin. Why, what did I? I did nothing, 
ru go further off. 

Ste. Didst thou not say, he lied? 

Ari. ThouUest. 

Ste. Do I so? take thou that. [SfnT^es Aim.] 
As you like tMs, give me the lie another time. 
Trin, I did not give the lie. — Out o* your 

wits and hearing too? A pox o* your bottle! 

tMs can sack and drinking do. — A murrain on 
your monster, and the devU take your fingers! 
Cal Ha, ha, ha! 

Ste. Now, forward with your tale. Pr’ythee, 
stand further off. 

Cal. Beat Mm enough: after a little time, 
I’U beat him too. 

Ste. Stand further. — Come, proceed. 

Cal. Why, as I told thee, ’fis a custom with him 
r the afternoon to sleep: there thou mayst brain 
him, 

Having first seized Ms books; or with a log 
Batter Ms skuU, or paunch Mm with a stake. 
Or cut Ms wezand mth thy knife. Remember, 
First to possess Ms books; for without tiiem 
He’s but a sot, as 1 am, nor hath not 
One spirit to command: they aU do hate him 
As rootedly as I. Bum but Ms books. 

He has brave utensils,— for so he caUs them, — 
WMch, when he has a house, he’U deck withal. 
And that most deeply to consider is 
The beauty of Ms daughter; he himself 
CaUs her a nonpareil; I never saw woman, 
But only Sycorox my dam and she; 

But she as far surpasseth Sycorax, 

As great’st does least. 

Ste. Is it so brave a lass? 

Cal. Ay, lord; she wiU become thy bed, 1 war- 
rant, 

And bring Ihee forth,brave brood. 

Ste. Monster, 1 wiU kiU tMs man: his 
daughter and I will be king and queen; — save 
our graces! — and Trinculo and thyself shaU be 
viceroys.— Dost thou like the plot, Trinculo! 
Trin. £xceUent. 

Ste. Oive me thy hand; 1 am sorry I beat 
thee: but while thou livest, keep a good tongue 
in thy head. 

Cal WitMn tMs half hour wiU he be asleep; 
WUt thou destroy Mm then? 

Ste. Ay, on mine honour. 

Ari. This wiU I teU my master. 

Cd. Thou mak’st me merry: I am full of 
pleasure; 

Let us be jocund: wiU you troll the catch 
You taught me but wMle-ere? 

Ste. At thy request, monster, I will do reason, 
any reason. Come on, Trinculo, let us sing. 

[Sinas. 

FUnU 'em, and aeoid 'em; and seaut 'em andflotU 'em; 
Thoiight is free. 

Cal That’s not the tune. 

[Ariel plays the tune on a tabor and pipe. 
Ste. What is tMs same? 

Trin. TMs is the tune of our catch, played 
by the picture of Nobody. 

Ste. If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy 
likeness: if thou beest a devil, take’t as thou 
list 

Trin. 0, forgive me my sins! 



14 


THE TEMPEST 


[act in 


Ste, He that dies, pays all debts: I defy 
thee: — Mercy upon us! 

Cal. Art thou afeard? 

Ste, Ho, monster, not 1. 

Cal, Bo not afeard; the isle is full of noises, 
Sounds, and sweet airs, that give delight and 
hurt not. 

Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments 
Willhumaboutmine ears; and sometimes voices, 
That, if 1 then had waked after long sleep. 

Will make me sleep again; and then, in 
dreaming, [riches 

The clouds, me^ought, would open and show 
Ready to drop upon me: that, when 1 waked, 
I cried to dream again. 

Ste. This will prove a brave kingdom to me, 
where I shall have my music for nothing. 

“ Cat. When Prospero is destroyed. 

Ste. That shall be by and by: I remember 
the story. 

Trin. The sound is going away: let’s follow 
'it, and after, do our work. 

Ste. lead, monster, we’ll follow.—I would 
I could see this taborer: he lays it on, 

Trin. Wilt come? I’ll follow, Stephano, 

\Bxeimt 

Scene 111.— Another part of the Island. 

Enter Alonzo, Sebastian, Antonio, 
Gonzalo, Adrian, Francisco, and others 

Gon. By’r lakin, I can go no further, sir; 

My old bones ache: here’s a maze trod, indeed, 
Through forth-rights and meanders! by your 
I needs must rest me. [patience. 

Alon. Old lord, I cannot blame thee. 
Who am myself attach’d with weariness, 

To the duUing of my spirits: sit down, and rest. 
Even here I wiU put off my hope, and keep it 
No longer for my flatterer: he is drown’d 
Whom thus we stray to find: and the sea mocks 
Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go. 
Anf. I am right glad that he’s so out of hope. 

[Aside to Seb. 

Do not, for one repulse, forego the purpose. 
That you resolved to effect. 

Seb. The next advantage 

Will we take thoroughly. [Aside to Ant. 

Ant. Ustde to Seb.] Let it be tonight; 

For, now they are oppress’d with travel, they 
Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance, 

As when they are fresh. 

Seb, [Aside to ANT.] I say tonight; no more. 

Solemn and strange music; and Prospero 
above, invisible. Enter several strange 
Shapes, bringing in a bariquet; they dance 
about it with gentle actions of salutation, 
and inviting the King, &c., to eat, they 
depart ' 

Atom What harmony is this? My good 
friends hark! 

Gon. Marvellous sweet'musicl 

Alan. Give us kind keepers, heavens! What 
were these? 

Seb. A living drollery: now I will believe, 
That there are unicorns; that, in Arabia 
There is one tree, the phoenik’ throne; one 
At this hour reignmg there. * [phoenix i 
' ru believe both; , 


And what does else want credit, come to me, 
And rU be sworn ’tis true : travellers ne’er did he . 
Though fools at home condemn them. 

Gon. If in Naples 

I should report this now, would they believe me’ 
If I should say, I saw such islanders,™ 

For, certes, these are people of the island,— 
Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet, 
note, 

Their manners are more gentle-kind than of 
Our human generation you shall find 
Many, nay, almost any. 

Pro. Honest lord, 

Thou hast said wall; for some of you there 
present 

Are worse than devils. [Asilde, 

Alon. I cannot too much muse, 

Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound, 
expressing, — 

Although they want the use of tongue,™ a kind 
Of excellent dumb discourse. 

Pro. Praise in departing. [Aatcfe. 

Fran. They vanish’d strangely. 

Seb. No matter, since 

They have left their vidnds behind; for we have 
stomachs, — 

Will’t please you taste of what is here? 

Alon. Not I. 

Gon. Faith, sir, you need not fear. When 
we were boys, [eers. 

Who would believe that there were mountain- 
Dew-lapp’d like bulls, whose throats had hang- 
ing at them 

Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men, 
Whose heads stood in their breasts? which now 
we find. 

Each putter-out of one for five, will bring us 
Good warrant of. 

Alon. X will stand to, and feed, 
Although my last: no matter, since I feel, 

The best is past: — Brother, my lord the duke, 
Stand to, and do as we. 

Thunder and lightning. Enter Ariel like a 
harpy; claps his wings upon the table, and 
with a quaint device the banquet vanishes, 

Ari. Y ou are three men of sin, whom destiny,— ■ 
That hath to instrument this lower world, 

And what is in ’t,™the never-surfeited sea 
Hath caused to belch up; and on this island 
Where man doth not inhabit; you ’mongst men 
Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad; 
And even with such like valour, men hang and 
Their proper selves, [drown 

[Alon., Seb. &c., draw their stmrds. 
You fools! I and my fellows 
Are ministers of fate; the elements, 

Of whom your swords are temjper’d, may as well 
Wound the loud winds, or with feemochfd-at stabs 
Kill the still-closing waters, as diminisdi 
One dowle that’s in my plume; my feUoyr- 
ministers 

Are like invulnerable; if you could hurt, 
Yourswordsarenowtoomassyforyourstrengths, 
And will not be uplifted. But, remember,™ 
For that’s my business to you,™ that you three 
From Milan did supplant good Prospero; 
Expos’d unto the sea, which hath re<|uit it, 
Him, and his innocent child : for which foul deed 
The powers, delaying, not forgetting have 



SCENE III.] 


TStE TEMPEST 


15 


Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the 
creatures. 

Against your peace: Thee, of thy son, Alonzo, 
They have bereft; and do pronounce by me, 
Lingering perdition,— worse than any death 
Can be at once,— shall step by step attend 
You and your ways; whose wraths to guard 
you from, — 

Which here, in this most desolate isle; else falls 
Uponyour heads, — is nothing butheart’s sorrow, 
And a clear life ensuing, 

He mnishes in thunder: then, to soft music, 
enter the Shapes again, and dance with mops 
and mows, and carry out the table. 

Pro. [Aside.] Bravely the figure of this harpy 
hast thou 

Perform’d, my Ariel; a grace it had devounng: 
Of my ins^uction hast ^ou nothing ’bated. 

In what thou hadst to say: so, with good life. 
And observation strange, my meaner ministers 
Their several kinds have done: my high charms 
And these, mine enemies, are all knit up [work. 
In their distractions: they now are in my power, 
And m these fits I leave them, whilst I visit 
Young Ferdinand,— who they suppose is 
And his and my loved darling, [drown’d,— 
\Extt Prospero from above. 
Gon. r the name of something holy, sir, why 
In this strange stare? [stand you 

Alon. 0, it is monstrous! monstrous! 

Mcthought the billows spoke, and told me of it, 
The winds did sing it to me; and the thunder. 
That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounced 
'The name of Prosper; it did bass my trespass. 
Therefore my son i’ the ooze is bedded; and 
I’ll seek him deeper than e’er plummet sounded. 
And with him there he mudded. [f xif. 

Seb. But one fiend at a time, 

I’ll fight their legions o’er. 

Ant. I’ll be thy second. 

[Fxeunf Seb. and Ant. 
Con All three of them are desperate; their 
great guilt, 

Like poison given to work a great time after. 
Now ’gins to bite the spirits: — I do beseech you 
That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly. 
And hinder them from what this ecstacy 
"May now provoke them to. 

Adr. Follow, I pray you. [Exeunt. 

ACT IV. 

Scene 1.— Before Prospero’s Cell 
Enter Prospero, Ferdinand, and Miranda 

Pro, If I have too austerely punished you. 
Your compensation makes amends; for I 
Have given you here a thread of mine own life, 
Or that for which I hve; who once again 
I tender to thy hand: all thy vexations 
Were but my trials of thy love, and thou 
Hast strangely stood the test: here, afore Heaven, 
I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand, 

Do not smile at me, that I boast her dfi, 

For thou shaft find she will outstrip all praise, 
And make it halt behind her. 

Per . . I do believe it. 

Against an oracle. 

Pro. Then, as my gift, and thine own 
acqmsition 


Worthily purchas’d, take my daughter: But 
If thou dost break her virgin knot before 
All sanctimonious ceremonies may 
With full and holy rite be minister’d, 

No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall 
To make this contract grow: but barren hate. 
Sour-eyed disdain, and discord, shall bestrew 
The union of your bed with weeds so loathly, 
Tha you shall hate it both: therefore, take 
As Hymen’s lamps shall hght you. [heed. 
Per. As I hope 

For quiet days, fair issue, and long life. 

With such love as ’tis now, the murkiest den 
The most opportune place, the strong’st sugges- 
Our worser Gemus can, shall never melt ^on 
Mine honour into lust, to take away 
The edge of that day’s celebration, [founder’d, 
When I shall think, or Phoebus’ steeds are 
Or night kept chain’d below. 

Pro. Fairly spoke: 

Sit, then, and talk with her, she is thine own. — 
What, Ariel; my industrious servant, Ariel! 

Enter Ariel. 

Ari. What would, my potent master^ here 
I am. [service 

Pro. Thou and thy meaner fellows your last 
Did worthily perform; and I must use you 
In such another tnck: go, bring the rabble. 
O’er whom I give thee power, here, to this place: 
Incite them to quick' motion; for I must 
Bestow upon the eyes of this young couple 
Some vanity of mine art; it is my piomise, 

And they expect it from me. 

Ari. Presently? 

Pro. Ay, with a twink. 

Ari. Before you can say, Come and go, 

And breathe twice; and cry, $ 0 , so; 

Each one, tripping on his toe, 

Will be here with mop and mow: 

Do you love me, master? no? [approach 
Pro. Dearly, my delicate Ariel, Do not 
Till thou dost hear me call. 

Ari. Well I conceive. [Exft. 

Pro. Look thou be true: do not give dalliance 
Too much the rein : the strongest oaths are straw 
To the fire i’ the blood: be more abstemious. 
Or else, good night your vow I 
Per. ' I warrant you, sir. 

The white cold virgin snow upon my ]h«art 
Abates the ardour of my liver. 

Pro. Well.— 

Now come, my Ariel: bring a corollary, 

Rather than want ^ spirit: appear, and pertly.— 
No tongue; all eyes; be silent. [So/f music. 

A Afasque* Enter Iris. 

Ms. Ceres, most bounteous lady, thy rich leas 
Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and pease; 
Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep, 
Andfiatmeadsthatch’dwithstover, them to keep; 
Thy banks with peonied and lifted brims, 
WMch spongy April at thy ’host betrims. 

To make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy 
broom groves, 

Whose shadow the dismissed bachelor lovely, 
Being lass-lorn; thy pole-dipt vineyard; 

And thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky-hard. 
Where thou thyself dost air: The queeno’ the sky 
Whose watery arch, and messenger, am I, 



x6 THE TEMPEST [activ. 


Bids thee leave these; and with her sovereign 
grace, 

Here on this grass-plot, in this very place, 

To come and sport: her peacocks fly amain; 
Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertain. 

Enter Ceres. 

Cer. Hail, many-colour’d messenger, that 
ne’er 

Dosft disobey the wife of Jupiter; 

Who, with thy saffron wings, upon my flowers 
Diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers; 
And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown 
My bosky acres, and my unshrubb’d down, 
Richj scarf to my proud earth;-“Why hath thy 
I queen 

Summon’dmehither, to this short-grass’d green? 

Iris* A contract of true love to celebrate; 
And some donation freely to estate 
On the bless’d lovers. 

Cer. Tell me, heavenly bow, 

If Venus, or her son, as thou dost know. 

Ho now attend the queen? since they did plot 
Th^eans, that dusky His my daughter got, 
Her and her blind boy’s scand^’d company 
I have forsworn. 

Iris. Of her society 

Be not afraid. I met her deity 
Cutting the clouds towards Paphos; and her son 
Hove-drawn with her; here thought they to have 
done 

Some wanton charm upon this man and maid^ 
Whose vows are that no bed-rite shall be paid 
Till Hymen’s torch be lighted; but m vain; 
Mars’ hot minion is return’d again; 

Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows, 
Swears he will shoot no more, but play with 
And be a boy right out. [sparrows, 

Cer. Highest queen of state. 

Great Juno comes; I know her by her gait. 

Enter Jxmo. 

Jun, How docs my bounteous sister? Go 
with me, 

To Mess this twain, that they may prosperous be, 
And honour’d in their issue. 

SONG. 

Jwn.— Honour, riches, mamaice-bleasiiig, 

Long continuance, and increasing, 

Hourly joys be still upon you! 

Jnno sings her blessings on you. 

Cer.— Earth’s increase, and foison plenty, 

Barns and garners never empty; 

Vines, with clust’ring bunches growing; 
Plants, with goodly burden bowing; 

Spring come to you, at the farthest, 

In the very end of harvest! 

Scarcity and want shall shim you 
Ceres’ blessing so is on you. 

Fer. This is a most majestic vision, and 
Harmonious charmingly: May I be bold 
To think these spirits? 

Pro. Spirits, which by mine art 

I h4ve from their confines called to enact 
My present fikucles. 

Per. Let me live here ever; 

So rare a wonder’d father, and a wise. 

Makes tfiie place Paradise. 

[Juno and Ceres whisper^ and 
send Iris on employment 


Pro. Sweet now, silence; 

Juno and Ceres whisper seriously; 

There’s something else to do; hush, and be mute, 
Or else our spell is marr’d. 

Iris. You nymphs, call’d Haiads, of the 
wind’ring brooks, [looks, 

With your sedged crowns, and ever harmless 
Leave your crisp channels, and on this green land 
Answer your summons: Juno does command. 
Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate 
A contract of true love; be not too late. 

Enter certain Nsunphs. 

You sun-bum’d sicMemen, of August weary. 
Come hither from the furrow, and be merry; 
Make holiday; your rye-straw hats put on, 

And these fresh nymphs encounter every one 
In country footing. 

Enter certain Reapers, properly habited; they 
Join with the Nymphs in a graceful dance; 
toumrds the end whereof Prospkro starts 
suddenly^ and ^eaks; after whichf to a 
strange^ hollow, and confused noise, they 
heavily vanish. 

Pro. [Asote] I had forgot that foul conspiracy 
Of the beast Caliban and his confederates 
Against my life; the minute of their plot 
Is almost come. — [To the Spirits.]'WeVL done; 

— avoid; — no more. [passion 

Per. This is strange; your father’s in some 
That works him strongly. 

Mira. Never till this day, 

Saw X him touch’d with anger so distemper’d. 

Pro. You do look, my son, in a moved sort. 
As if you were dismay’d: be cheerful, sir: 

Our revels now are ended: these our actors. 

As I foretold you, were all spirits, and 
Are melted into air, into thin air: 

And, like the baseless fabric of this vision 
The cloud-capp’d tovrers, the gorgeous palaces. 
The solemn temples, the great globe itself, 
Yea, all which it inherit, shall ^ssolve, 

And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, 
Leave not a rack behind: We are such stuff 
As dreams are made of, and our little life 
Is rounded with a sleep.— Sir, I am vex’d: 

Bear with my weakness; my old brainia troubled. 
Be not disturb’d with my infirmity; 

If you be pleased, retire into my cell, 

And there repose; a turn or two I’H walk, 

To still my beating mind. 

Per. Mira. We wish your peace. 

[Exeunt. 

Pro. Come, with a thought: — I thajok you; 
— Ariel, come. 

Enter Ariel. 

Ari. Thy thoughts I cleave to: Whafs thy 
pleasure? 

Pro. Spirit, 

We must prepare to meet with Caliban. 

Ari. Ay, my commander; when I presented 
Ceres, 

I thought to have told thee of it; but I fear’d 
Lest I might anger thee. ^ [varlets? 

Pro, Say agrin, where didst thou leave these 
Art, 1 told you, sir, they were red-hot with 
drinking: 

So full of valour that they smote the air 



SCENE I.] 


THE TEMPEST 


17 


For breathing in their faces; heat the ground 
For kissing of their feet; yet always heading 
Towards their project: Then I heat my taher, 
At which, like nnhack’d colts, they prick’d their 
ears, 

Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses 
As they smelt music; so I charm’d their ears, 
That, calf-hke, they my lowing follow’d through 
Tooth’d hriers, sharp furzes, prictamg goss, and 
thorns, 

Which enter’d their frail shins: at last I left them 
r the filthy mantled pool beyond your cell, 
There dancing up to the chms, that the foul lake 
O’erstunk their feet. 

Pro. This was well done, my bird; 

Thy shape invisible retain thou still: 

The trumpery in my house, go, bring it hither. 
For stale to catch these thieves. 

Ari. 1 go, I go. [Exit. 

Pro. A devil, a bom devil, on whose nature 
Nurture can never stick; on whom my pains, 
Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost: 

And as, with age, his body uglier grows, 

So his mind cankers: I will plague them all. 

Re-enter Ariel, loaden wilh glistering 
apporel, &c. 

Even to roaring: — Come, hang them on this line, j 

pROSPERO and Ariel remain invisible. Enter 
Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo, all wet. 
Cal. Pray you, tread softly, that the blind 
mole may not 

Hear a footfall: we now are near his cell. 

Ste. Monster, your fairy, which you say is a 
harmless fairy, has done little better than 
played the Jack with us. 

Trin. Monster, I do smell all horse-piss; at 
which my nose is in great indignation. 

Sie. So is mme. Do you hear, monster? If I 
should take a displeasure against you ; look you,— 
Trin. Thou wert but a lost monster. 

Cal. Good, my lord, give me thy favour stUl: 
Be patient, for the prize I’ll bring thee to 
Shall hood-wmk this mischance: therefore speak 
All’s hush’d as midnight yet. (softly, 

Trin. Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool — 
Ste. There is not only disgrace and dis- 
honour in that, monster, but an infinite loss- 
Trin. That’s more to me than my wetting: 
yet this is your harmless fairy monster. 

Ste. I will fetch off my bottle, though I be 
o'er ears for my labour. fheic. 

Cal. Pr’ythee, ray king, be quiet: Seest thou 
This IS the mouth o’ the cell: no noise, and enter. 
Do that good mischief, which may make this 
island 

Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban, 

For aye thy foot-licker. 

5/e. Give me thy band: I do begin to have 
bloody thoughts. 

Trin. 0 king Stephano! O peer! 0 worthy 
Stephano! look, what a wardrobe here is for thee. 
Cal. Let it alone, thou fool; it is but trash. 
Trin. 0, ho, monster; we know what be- 
longs to a frippery. — 0 Mng Stephano! 

S/e. Put off that gown, Trinculo; by this 
hand, I’ll have that gown: 

Trm. Thy grace shall have it. (mean, 
Cal The dropsy drown this fool! what do you 


To dote thus on such luggage? Let’s along, 
And do the murder first: if he awake. 

From toe to crown he’ll fill our skins with 
pinches; 

Make us strange stuff. 

Ste. Be you quiet, monster.— Mistress line, 
is not this my jerkin? N ow is the jerkin under 
the line: now, jerkin, you are like to lose your 
hair, and prove a bald jerkin. 

Trin. Do, do: We steal by line and level, 
ain’t like your grace. 

Ste. I thank thee for that jest: here’s a 
garment for ’t: wit shall not go unrewarded 
while I am king of this countiy: Steal by line 
and level, is an excellent pass of pate; there’s 
another garment for ’t. 

Trin. Monster, come, put some lime upon 
your fingers, and away with the rest. [time, 

Cal. I will have none on’t: we shall lose our 
And all be turned to barnacles, or to apes 
With foreheads viUanous low. 

Ste. Monster, lay to yourfingers;help to bear 
this away where my hogshead of wine is, or I’ll 
turn you out of my kingdom: go to, carry this. 
Trin. And this. 

Ste. Ay, and this. 

A noise of hunters heard. Enter di vers Spirits, 
in shape of hounds, and hunt them about, 
pROSPERO and Ariel setting them on. 

Pro. Hey, Mountain, hey! 

Ari. Silver! there it goes, Silver! [hark! 
Pro. Fury, Fury! there, Tyrant, there! hark, 
[Cal., Ste., and Trin. are driven out. 
Go, charge my goblins that they grind their joints 
With dry convulsions; shorten up their sinews 
With aged cramps; and more pinch-spotted make 
Than pard or cat o’mountain. [them. 

An. Hark, they roar. 

Pro. Let them be hunted soundly: At this 
Lie at my mercy all mine enemies: [hour 

Shortly shall all my labours end, and thou 
Shalt have the air at freedom: for a little 
Follow, and do me service. [Exeunt. 

ACT V. 

Scene I.— Ne/ore the Cell of Prospero. 
Enter Prospero in his magic robes; and Ariel. 

Pro. Now does my project gather to a head: 
My charms crack not; my spirits obey; and time 
Goes upright with his carriage. How’s the day? 

An, On the sixth hour; at which time, my 
You said our work should cease. [lord. 

Pro. I did say so, 

When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit, 
How fares the king and *s followers? 

Ari. Confin’d together 

In the same fashion as you gave in charge; 
Just as you left them, sir; all prisoners 
In the lime-grove which weather-fendsyourcell; 
They cannot budge till your release. The king, 
His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted , 
And the remainder mourning over them, 
Brimful of sorrow and dismay; but chiefly 
Him you termed, sir, The good old lord Gonzalo; 
His tears run down his beard, like winter’s drops 
From eaves of reeds: your charm so strongly 
works them, 



THE TEMPEST 


{act V. 


i8 

That if. you now beheld them, your affections Thou’rt pinch’d for ’t now, Sebastian, flesh and 

Would becofne tender. blood. — 


Pro. Dost thou think so, spirit? 

Art. Mine would, sir, were I human. 

Pro. And mine shall. 

Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling 
Of their auctions? and shall not myself. 

One of their kind, that relish all as sharply 
Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art? 
Though With their high wrongs I am struck to 
the quick, 

Yet, with my nobler reason, ’gainst my fury 
Do I take part: the rarer action is 
In virtue than in vengeance: they being penitent. 
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend 
Hot a frown further. Go, release them, Ariel; 
My charms I’ll break, their senses I’ll restore. 
And they shall be themselves. 

Ari. I’ll fetch them, sir. [Exit. 

Pro, Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, 
and groves; 

And ye that on, the sands with printless foot 
Do chase the ebbing Neptune, and do fly him 
When he comes back; you demi-puppets that 
By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make, 
Whereoftkeewenotbites;andyouwhosepastime 
Is to make midnight mushrooms, that rejoice 
To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid, — 
Weak masters thou^ ye be,— I haVe bedimm’d 
Thenoontidesun,call’dforththemutinous winds, 
And ’twixt the green sea and the azured vault 
Set roaring war: to the dread rattling thunder 
Have I given fire, and rifted Jove’s stout oak 
With his own bolt: the strong-based promontory 
Have I made shake: and by the spurs pluck’d up 
The pine and cedar: graves, at my command, 
Have waked their sleepers, oped, and let them 
forth 

By my so potent art. But this rough magic 
I here abjure: and, when 1 have required 
Some heavenly music, — ^which even now I do, — 
To work mine end upon their senses, that 
This airy charm is for, I’ll break my staff, 
Bury it certain fathoms in the earth, 

And deeper than did ever plummet sound 
I’ll drown my book. {Solemn music. 

Reenter Ariel: after him Alonso, with a 
frantic gesture f attended by Gonzalo; Sebas~ 
TiAN and Antonio in like manner, attended by 
‘ Adrian and Francisco: they all enter the 
circle which Prospero herd made, and there 
stand charmed^ which Prospero observing, 
s^aks, 

A solemn air, and the best comforter 
To an unsettled fancy, cure thy brains, [stand, 
Now useless, boil’d within thy skulll There 
For you are spell-stopp’d. — 

Holy Gonzalo, honourable man. 

Mine eyes, even sociable to the show of thine, 
Fallf ellowlsr drops. — The charm dissolves apace; 
And as the morning steals u^on the night, 
Melting the darkness, so their rising senses 
Begm to chase the ignorant fumes mat mantle 
Their clearer reason. — 0 good Gonzald, 

My true preserver, and a loyal sir 
To him thou follow’st; I will pay thy graces 
Home, both in word and deed. — Most cruelly 
Didst thou, Alonzo, use me and my daughter; 
Thy brother was a furtherer in the act;- 


You brother mine, that entertain ambition, 
Expell’d remorse and nature; who, with Sebas- 
tian, — [strong, ~ 

Whose inward pinches therefore are most 
Would here have Mfl’d your king; I do forgive 
thee, [ing 

Unnatural though thou art. — Their understand- 
Begins to swell; and the approaching tide 
Will shortly fill the reasonable shore 
That now lies foul and muddy. N ot one of them 
That yet looks on me, or would know me. — Ariel, 
Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell; 

[Exit Ariel. 

I will disease me, and myself present 
As I was sometime Milan: quickly, spirit; 
Thou Shalt ere long be free. 

Ariel re-enters, singing, and helps to attire 
Prospero. 

Ari. Where the bee sucks, there suck I; 

In the cowslip’s bell I lie: 

There I couch when owls do cry. 

On the bat’s back I do fly 
After summer merrily: 

Merrily, merrily shall I live now, 

Under the blossom that hangs on the bough. 

Pro. Why, that’s my dainty Ariel: I shall 
miss thee; 

But yet thou shalt have freedom; so, so, so.— 
To the king’s ship, invisible as thou art: 

There shalt thou find the mariners asleep 
Under the hatches; the master and the boatswain 
Being awake, enforce them to this place; 

And presently, I pr’ythee. 

An. I dnnk the air before me, and return 
Or e’er your pulse twice beat. [j&xff Ariel. 
<?on. All torment, trouble, wonder, and 
amazement 

Inhabits here. Some heavenly power guide us 
Out of this fearful country! 

Pro. Behold, sir king. 

The wronged Duke of Milan, Prospero; 

For more assurance that a living prince 
Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body; 
And to thee and thy company I hid 
A hearty welcome. 

Alon. Whether thou beest he or no. 

Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me, 

As late I have been, I not know: thy pulse 
Beats, as of flesh and blood; and, since I saw 
thee. 

The affiction of my mind amends, with which, 
I fear, a madness held me; this must crave,— 
An if this be at all, — a most strange story. 

Thy dukedom I resign; and do entreat 
Thou pardon me my wrongs,— But how should 
Prospero 

Be living and be here? 

Pro, First, noble friend. 

Let me embrace thine age, whose honour capnot 
Be measured or confined. 

Gon, Whether this be 

Or be not, PH not swear. 

Pro, You do :ret taste 

Some subtilties o* the isle, that will not let you 
Beheve things certain— Welcome, my friends, 
all:— (Asirfe to Sbb. onri Ant, 
But you, my brace of lords, were I so mbaded, 



SCENE I.] 


THE TEMPEST 


19 


I here could pluck Ms Mghness’ frown upon you, 
And justify you traitors; at tMs time 
I’ll tell no tales. 

Seb. The devil speaks in Mm. [Aside, 

Pro. No: 

For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother 
Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive 
Thy rankest fault, — all of them; and require 
My dukedom of thee, wMch, perforce, I know 
Thou must restore. ^ 

Alon, If thou beest Prospero, 

Give us particulars of thy preservation: 

How thou hast met us here, who three hours since 
Were wreck’d upon tMs shore; where I have 
lost — 

How sharp the point of tMs remembrance is! — 
My dear son Ferdinand. 

Pro. I am woe for ’t, sir. 

Alon. Irreparable is the loss; and patience 
Says it is past her cure. 

Pro. I rather tMnk 

You have not sought her help; of whose soft grace 
For the like loss I have her sovereign aid, 

And rest myself content. 

Alon. You the like loss? 

Pro. As great to me as late; and, supportable 
To make the dearloss, have Imeansmuch weaker 
Than you may call to comfort you; for I 
Have lost my daughter. 

Alon. A daughter! 

0 heavens, that they were hving both m Naples, 
The king and queen there I that they were, I wish 
Myself were mudded in that oozy bed 
Where my son lies. When did you lose your 

daughter? [lords 

Pro. In tMs last tempest. I perceive these 
At this encounter do so much admire 
That they devour their reason, and scarce tMnk 
Their eyes do offices of truth, their words 
Are natural breath; but, howsoe’er you have 
Been justled from your senses, know for certain 
That I am Prospero, and that very duke 
WMch was thrust forth of Milan; who most 
strangely [landed, 

Upon this shore, where you were wreck’d, was 
To be the lord on’t. No more yet of tMs; 

For ’tis a chronicle of day by day, 

Not a relation for a breakfast, nor 
Befitting tMs first meeting. Welcome, sir; 
TMs cell’s my court: here have I few attendants, 
And subjects none abroad: pray you, look in. 
My dukedom since you have given me again, 

1 ip^l requite you with as good a tMng: 

At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye 
As much as me my dukedom. 

The entrance of the CeU opens, and discovers 
Ferdinand and Miranda playinp at chess. 
Mira. Sweet lord, you play me false. 

Per. No, my dearest love, 

' I would not for the world. 

Mira. Y es, for a score of kingdoms you should 
And I would call it fair play. [wrangle, 

Aim. If tMs prove 

A vision of the island, one dear son 
Shall twice lose. 

Sebj. A nmst Mgh miracle? 

Per, Thoughthe setsthreaten,theyaremerci- 
I have cursed them without cause. [ful; 

[Ferd. kneels to Alon. 


Alon. Now all the blessings 

Of a glad father compass thee about! 

Arise and say how thou cam’st here. 

Mira. O, wonder! 

How many goodly creatures are there here! 
How beauteous mankind is ! 0 brave new world. 
That hath such people in’t! 

Pro. ’Tis new to thee. 

Alon. What is this maid, with whom thou 
wast at play? 

Your eld’ St acquaintance cannot be three hours; 
Is she the goddess that hath sever’d us. 

And brought us thus together'^’ 

Per. Sir, she’s mortal; 

But by immortal providence she’s mine; 

I chose her when I could not ask my father 
For Ms advice, nor thought I had one: she 
Is daughter to tMs famous Duke of Milan, 

Of whom so often I have heard renown 
But never saw before; of whom I have 
Received a second life; and second father 
TMs lady makes Mm to me. 

Alon. I am hers; 

But 0, how oddly will it sound that I 
Must ask my cMld forgiveness! 

Pro. There, sir, stop; 

Let us not burden our remembrances 
With a heaviness that’s gone. 

Gon. I have inly wept, 

Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you 
And on tMs couple drop a blessed crown; [gods. 
For it is you that have chalk’d forth the way 
WMch broug^it us Mtherl 
Alon. I say, Amen, Gonzalo! 

Gon. Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his 
issue 

Should become kings of Naples? 0, rejoice 
Beyond a common joy; and set it down 
With gold on lasting pillars: in one voyage 
Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis; 

And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife 
Where he himself was lost; Prospero Ms duke- 
In a poor isle; and all of us ourselves [dom 
When no man was Ms own. 

Alon. Give me your hands: 

[To Ferd. and Mm. 

Let grief and sorrow still embrace Ms heart 
That doth not wish you joy! 

Gon. Be ’t so! Amen! 

Re-enter Ariel, with the Master and Boat- 
swain amazedly following. 

0 look, sir, look, sir; here are more of us! 

1 prophesied, if a gallows were on land, 

TMs fellow could not drown. Now, blasphemy, 
That swear’st grace o’erboard, not an oath on 
shore? 

Hast thou no mouth by land? What is tbe news? 
Boats. The best news is, that we have safely 
found 

Our king and company: the next, our sMp,— 
WMch, but three glasses since, we gave out split, 
Is tight, and yare, and bravely rigg’d, as when 
We first put out to sea. 

Art. Sir, all tMs service ! 

Have I done smce I went. r Aside. 

Pro. My tricksy spirit! j 

Alon, These are not naturau events; they 
strengthen [hither? 

From strange to stranger:— Say, how came you 



THE TEMPEST 


[ACT V.I 


Boats, If I did think, sir, I were well awake, 
I'd Btrire to tell you. We were dead of sleep, 
And,— how, we know not, — ail clapp’d under 
hatches, [noises 

Where, but even now, with strange and several 
Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains, 
And more diversity of sounds, all horrible. 

We were awaked; straightway, at liberty; 
Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld 
Our royal, good, and gallant ship; our master 
Capering to eye her: on a trice, so please you. 
Even in a dream, were we divided from them, 
And were brought moping hither. 

Ari. Was’t well done! I 

Fro. Bravely, my diligence. Thou > Asitfe. 

Shalt be free. J 

iZon. Thisisas strangeamazease’ermentrod: 
And there is in this business more than nature 
Y7as ever conduct of: some oracle 
Must rectify our knowledge. 

Pro. Sir, my liege. 

Do not infest your mind with beating on 
Thestxangencssofthisbusinessiatpick’dleisure, 
Which shall be shortly, single I’ll resolve you, — 
Which to you shall seem probable, — of every 
These happen’d accidents: ^ when, be cheerful, 
And think of each thing well.— Come hither, 
spint; [Aside, 

Set Caliban and his companions free. 

Untie the spell. [Exit Ariel.] How fares 
my gracious sir? 

There are yet missing of your company 
Some few odd lads that you remember not. 

Re-enter Ariel, driving in Caliban, Ste- 
PHANo, and Trinculo, in their stolen 

Ste, Every man shift for all the rest, and let 
no man take care for himself; for all is but for- 
tune-— Coragio, bully-monster, coragiol 
Tnn. If these be true spies which 1 wear in 
my head, here’s a goodly sight. 

Cal. 0 SetoboB, these he brave spirits indeed! 
How fine my master is! I am afraid 
He will chastise me. 

Seb. Ha, ha; 

What things are these, my lord Antonio! 

Will money buy them? 

Anf, Very like; one of them 
Is a plain fish, and, no doubt, marketable. 
jPro, Mark but the badges of these men, my 

lords, [knave, 

Then say if they be true. This mis-shapen 
His n^other was a witch; and one so strong 
That could control the moon, make flows and 
ebbs, 

And deal in her command, without her power: 
These three have robb’d me: and this demi- 
devil, — 

For he’s a bastard one,— had plotted with them 
To take my life; two of these fellows you 
Must know and own; this thing of darkness I 
Acknowledge mine. 

Cal. I shall be pinch’d to death. 

Alon. IsnotthisStephano, my drunken butler? 
Seb. He is drtink now: where had he wine? 
Alon. And Tiinculo is reeling ripe: where 
should they 

Find this grand liquor that hath gilded them?— 
How cam’st thou in this pickle? 


Trm. I have been in such a pickle since I 
saw you last that, I fear me, will never out of 
my hones: I shall not fear fly-blowing. 

Seb. Why, how now, St^hano? 

Ste. O, touch me not; 1 am not Stephano, 
but a cramp. 

Pro. You’d be king of the isle, sirrah! 

Ste. I should have been a sore one then. 
Alon. This is as strange a thing as e’er I 
look’d on. [Pointing to Caliban. 
Pro. He is as disproportioned in his manners 
As in his shape.— Go, sirrah, to my cell; 

Take with you your companions; as you look 
To have my pardon, trim it handsomely. 

Cal. Ay, that I will; and I’ll be wise here- 
after. 

And seek for grace. What a thrice-double ass 
Was I to take this drunkard for a god, 

And worship this dull fool! 

Pro. Go to; away! 

Alon. Hence, and bestow luggage 

where you found it. 

Seb. Or stole it, rather. 

[Exeunt Cal., Ste., and Tren. 
Pro. Sir, I invite your highness and your train 
To my poor cell: where you shall take your rest 
For this one mght; which (part of it) I’ll waste 
With such discourse as, 1 not doubt, shall 
make it 

Go quick away,— tho story of my life, 

And the particular accidents gone by 
Since I came to this isle: and in the mom 
I’ll bring you to your ship, and so to Haples, 
Where I have hope to see the nuptial 
Of these our dear-beloved solemniz’d; 

And thence retire me to my Milan, where 
Every third thought shall be my grave. 

Alon. I long 

To hear the story of your life, which must 
Take the ear strangely. 

Pro. I’ll deliver all; 

And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales, 
And sail so expeditious, that shall catch 
Your royal fleet afar off. — My Ariel, — chick, — 
That is thy charge: then to the elements 
Be free, and fare thou well! — [Asufe.] Please 
you, draw near. [Exeunt. 

EPILOGUE. 

SPOKEN BY PROSPERO 
Wow my charms are all o’erlhrown, 

And what strength I have ’s mine own,— 
Which is most faint: now ’tis true, 

I must be here confined by you, 

Or sent to Naples. Let me not, 

Since I have ray dukedom got. 

And pardon’d me deceiver, dweU 
In this bare island by your spell; 

But release me from my bands 
With the help of your good hands. 

Gentle breath of yoxCrs my sails 
Must fill, or else my project fails, 

Which was to please. Wow I want 
Spirits to enforce, art to enchant; 

And my ending is despair 
Unless I he rehoved by prayer; 

Which pierces $o, that it assaults 
Mercy itself, and frees all faults. 

As you from crimes would pardon’d be, 
Let your indulgence set me free. 



THE TWO GENTLEMEN 
OF VERONA 


PERSONS REPRESENTED 


Duke of Milan, father to Silvia, 

[ Gentlemen of Verona* 
Antonio! father to Proteus. 

Thurio, a foolish Rival to Valentine. 
Eglamour, Agent for Silvia in her escape. 
Speed, a clownish Servant to Valentine. 
Launce, Servant to Proteus. 

Panthino, Servant to Antonio, 

Scene, — Sometimes in Verona; sometimes 
ACT I. 

Scene i — An open place in Verona. 
Enter Valentine and Proteus. 

VaL Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus; 

ever homely witSL 

Wert not aSection chains thy tender days 
To the sweet glances of thy honour’d love, 

1 rather would entreat thy company 
To see the wonders of the world abroad. 

Than, living dully sluggardiz’d at home, 

Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness. 
But since thoulov’st, love still, and thrive therein. 
Even as I would, when I to love begin, [adieu! 

fyo. WEt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, 
Think on thy Proteus, when thou haply seest 
Some rare noteworthy object in thy travel: 
Wish me partaker in thy happiness 
When thou dost meet good hap: and in thy 
danger, 

If ever danger do en^on thee. 

Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers. 
For I will be thy beadsman, Valentine. 

VaL And on a love-book pray for my success. 
fro. Upon some book I love PE pray for thee. 


Host, where Julia lodges in Milan, 

Outlaws. 

Julia, a Lady of Verona, beloved by Proteus, 
Silvia, the Duke's daughter, beloved by 
Valentine. 

Lucetta, Waitmg-iooman to Julu. 

Servants. Musicians, 

in Milan; and on the frontiers of Mantua. 

VaL That’sonsome shaEowstory of deeplove, 
How young Leander cross’d the Hellespont, 
Pro. That’s a deep story of a deeper love; 
For he was more than over shoes in love. 

VaL ’ Tis true ; for you are over boots in love, 
And yet you never swam to HeUespont. 
fro. Over the boots! nay, give me not the 
boots. 

VaL No, I wEl not, for it boots thee not. 
fro. What? 

VaL To be in love, where scorn is bought 
with ^oans; 

Coy looks with heart-sore sighs; one fading 
moment’s mirth 

With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights: 
If haply won, perhaps a hapless gain; 

If lost, why then a grievous labour won; 
However, but a folly bought with wit. 

Or else a wit by foUy vanquished, [fool. 
Pro. So, by your circumstance, you call me 
VaL So, by your circumstance, I fear you’ll 
prove. 

Pro. ’Tis love you cavil at; 1 am not Love, 
VaL Love is your master, for he masters you: 
And he that is so yoked by a fool, 

Methmks should not be chronicled for wise. 



TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA [act l 


Pro. Yet writers say, As in the sweetest bud 
The eatmg canter dwells, so eating love 
Inhabits in the finest wits of all. [bud 

Val. And writers say, As the most forward 
Is eaten by the canker ere it blow, 

Even so by love the young and tender wit 
Is turn'd to folly; blasting in the bud, 

Losing his verdure even in the prime, 

And all the fair effects of future hopes. 

But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee 
That art a votary to fond desire? 

Once more adieu: my father at the road 
Expects my coming, there to see me shipp'd. 
Pro. And thither will I bring thee, Valentine. 
VaL Sweet Proteus, no; now let us take our 
leave. 

At Milan let me hear from thee by letters 
Of thy success in love, and what news else 
Betideth here in absence of thy friend; 

And I likewise will visit thee with mine. 

Pro. All happiness bechance to thee in Milan! 
Val. As much to you at home! and so fare- 
well. [Exit Valentine. 

Pro. He after honour hunts, I after love; 

He leaves his friends to digmfy them more; 

I leave myself, my friends, and all for love. 
Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphos’d me; 
Made me neglect my studies, lose my time, 
War with good counsel, set the world at nought: 
Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with 
thought. 

Enter Speed. 

Silked. Sir Proteus, save you. Saw you my 
master? 

Pro. But now he parted hence, to embark for 
Milan. 

Speed. Twenty to one, then, he is shipp’d 
already; 

And I have play'd the sheep in losing him. 

Pro. Indeed a sheep doth very often stray 
An if the shepherd be awhile away. 

Speed. You conclude that my master is a 
shepherd, then, and I a sheep? 

Pro. Ido. 

Speed. Why, then, my -horns are his horns 
whether I wake or sleep. 

Pro. A silly answer, and fitting well a sheep. 
Speed. This proves me still a sheep. 

Pro. True; and thy master a shepherd. 
Speed. Nay; that I can deny by a circum- 
stance. 

Pro. It shall go hard but I’ll prove it by 
another. 

Speed. The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not 
the sheep the shepherd; but I seek my master, 
and my master seeks not me; therefore, I am 
no sheep. 

Pro. The sheep for fodder follow the shep- 
herd, the shepherd for food follows not the 
sheep; thou for wages followest thy master, 
thy master for wages follows not thee: there- 
fore, thou art a sheep. 

Speed, Such another proof will make me cry 
baa. ' 

Pro. But dost thou hear? gav'st thou my 
letter to Julia? 

Speed. Ay, sir; I, a lost mutton, gave your 
letter to her, a laced mutton; and She, a laced 


mutton, gave me, a lost mutton, nothing for 
my labour! 

Pro. Here’s too small a pasture for such a 
store of muttons. 

Speed. If the ground be overcharged you 
were best stick her? 

Pro. Nay; m that you are astray; ’twere 
best pound you. 

Speed. Nay, sir; less than a pound shall 
serve me for carrying your letter. 

Pro. You mistake; I mean the pound, a 
pinfold. 

Speed. From a pound to a pin? fold it over 
and over, [your lover. 

’Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to 

Pro. But what said she? did she nod? 

Speed. [Nodding.] Ay. 

Pro. Nod — Ay“Why, that’s noddy. 

Speed. You mistook, sir; I say she did nod: 
and you ask me if she did nod; and I say, Ay. 

Pro. And that set together is — noddy. 

Speed. Now you have taken the pains to set 
it together, take it for your pains. 

Pro. No, no; you shall have it for bearing 
the letter. 

Speed, Well, I perceive I must be fain to 
bear with you. 

Pro. Why, sir, how do you bear with me? 

Speed. Marry, sir, the letter very orderly: 
having nothing but the word noddy for my 
pains. 

Pro. Beshrew me, but you have a quick wit. 

Speed. And yet it cannot overtake your slow 
purse. 

Pro. Come, come; open the matter in brief: 
what said she? 

Speed. Open your purse, that the money and 
the matter may be both at once delivered. 

Pro. WeU, sir, here is for your pains: what 
said she? 

Speed. Truly, sir, I think you’ll hardly win 
her. 

Pro. Why, couldst thou perceive so much 
from her? 

Speed. Sir, I could perceive nothing at all 
from her; no, not so much as a ducat for de- 
livering your lettei; and being so hard to me 
that brought your mind, I fear she’ll prove as 
hard to you in telhng her mind. Give her no 
token but stones; for she’s as hard as steel. 

Pro. What! said she nothing? 

Speed. No, not so much as— 'fahe this for thy 
pains. To testify your bounty, I thank you, 
you have testera’d me; in requital whereof, 
henceforth carry your letters yourself: and so, 
sir, I’ll commend you to my master, [wreck, 

Pro. Go, go; begone, to save your ship from 
Which cjinnot perish, having thee aboard, 
Being destined to a drier death on shore. 

I must go send some better messenger; 

I fear my Julia would not deign my Hues, 
Receivmg them from such a wortMess post. 

I Wxemt 

ScENk ll.'—The same, 

Home. ^ 

\Enter Julia and Iucetta. 

Jul. ®ut say, Lucetta, now We are alone, 
Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love? 



TWO GENTLEMEN OP VERONA 


23 


Luc. Ay, madam, so you stumble uot un- 
heedfully. 

Juh Of all the fair resort of gentlemen 
That every day with park encounter me, 

In thy opimon which is worthiest love? 

Luc. Please you, repeat their names; I’ll 
show my mind 

According to my shallow simple skill, 

Jul, What think’st thou of the fair Sir 
Eglamour? [fine; 

Luc. As of a knight well-spoken, neat, and 
But were I you, he never should be mine. 

Jul. What think’st thou of the rich Mercatio’ 
Luc. W ell of his wealth; but of himself, so so. 
Jul. What think’st thou of the gentle Proteus’ 
Luc. Lord, lord I to see what folly reigns 
in us! 

Jul. How now! what means this passion at 
his name? iShame 

Luc. Pardon, dear madam, ’tis a passing 
That I, unworthy body as I am, 

Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen. 

Jul. Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest? 
Luc. Then thus ; of many good I think him best. 
Jul. Your reason? 

Luc. I have no other but a woman’s reason* 
I think him so, because I think him.so. 
jul. And' wouM^^^ me^ast my love 

on him? [away, 

Luc, Ay, if you thought your love not cast 
Jul* Why, he of all the rest hath never 
moved me. [loves ye. 

Luc. Yet he of all the rest, 1 think, best 
Jul, His little speaking shows his love but 
small. 

Luc, Fire that is closest kept burns most of all. 
Jul, They do not love that do not show their 
love. [their love. 

Luc. 0, they love least that let men know 
Jul. I would I knew his mind. 

Luc. Peruse this paper, madam. 

[Giyes a letter. 
Jul. [reads] ‘To JuUu,* — Say, from whom? 
Luc. That the consents will show. 

Julf Say, say; who gave it thee? 

Luc. Sir Valentine’s page; and sent, I think, 
from Proteus: \ [the way, 

He would have given it yo.u; but I, being in 
Did m your name receive i^ pardon the fault, 
I pray. 1 

Jul Now, by my modestyj a goodly broker! 
Dare you presume to harbow wanton lines? 
To whisper and conspire against my youth? 
Now, trust me, ’tis an ofiice bf great worth, 
And you an officer fit for the place. 

There, take the paper; see it, he return’d; 

Or else return no more into my sight. 

Luc. To plead for love ci|eserves more fee 
Jul. Will you be gone? j [than hate. 
Luc. That you maj^ ruminate. [Exff. 
Jul And yet, I wopld I had o’erlook’d the 
It were a shame to call her bpck agaiUj [letter. 
And pray her to a fault for v^ich I chid her. 
What fool is she, that knows 4 am a maid, 

And would not force the letteoo my view? 
Since maids, in modesty, say No to that 
Which they would have the prefer er construe Ay. 
Fie, fie! how wayward is this foolish love, 
That, like a testy babe, wiU scratch the nurse, 
And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod! 


How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence, 

When willingly I would have had her here! 

How angnly I taught my brow to frown, 

When inward joy enforced my heart to smile ! 
My penance is to call Lucetta back, 

And ask remission for my folly past:— 

What, ho! Lucetta? 

Re-enter Lucetta. 

Luc. What would your ladyship? 

Jul Is it near dinner time? 

Luc. I would it were: 

That you might kill your stomach on your meat, 
And not upon your maid. 

Jul What is’t you took up 

So gingerly? 

Luc Nothing. 

Jul Why didst thou stoop then? 

Luc. To take a paper up that I let fall. 

Jul. And IS that paper nothing? 

Luc. Nothing concerning me. 

Jul Then let it he for those that it concerns. 
Luc. Madam, it will not lie where it concerns, 
Unless it have a false interpreter. 

Jul Some love of yours hath writ to you in 
rhyme. 

Luc. That I might sing it, madam, to a tune: 
Give me a note: your ladyship can set. 

Jul. As little by such toys as may be possible; 
Best sing it to the tune of Light o’ love. 

Luc. It is too heavy for so light a tune. 

Jul. Heavy! behke it hath some burden, then. 
Luc. Ay; and melodious were it, would you 
smg it. 

Jul And why not you? 

Luc. I cannot reach so high. 

Jul Let’s see your song. — How now, 
minion? [it out: 

Luc. Keep tune there still, so you will sing 
And yet methinks I do not like this tune. 

Jul You do not? 

Luc. No, madam; it is too sharp. 

Jul You, minion, are too saucy, 

Luc. Nay, now you are too flat. 

And mar the concord with too harsh a descant, 
There wanteth but a mean to fill your song. 
Jul The mean is drown’d with your unruly 
base. 

Luc. Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus, [me. 
Jul This babble shall not henceforth trouble 
Here is a coil with protestation!— 

[Tears the letter. 

Go, get you gone; and let the papers he: 

You would be fingering them, to anger me. 
Luc, She makes it strange; but she would 
be best pleased 

To be so anger’d with another letter. [Exit 
Jul. Nay, would- 1 were so anger’d with the 
same! 

0 hateful hands, to tear such loving words! 
Injurious wasps! to feed on such sweet hodey, 
And kill the bees that yield, it, with your stings! 
I’U kiss each several paper for amends. 

And here is writ— Amd Julia , — unkind Julia! 
As in revenge of thy ingratitude, 

1 throw thy name against the bruising stoites, 
Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain. 
Look, here is wnt’— love-wounded Proteus: -r 
Poor wounded name! by bosom, as a bed. 



24 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 


[act I. 


Shall lodge thee till thy wound be thoroughly 
heal’d; 

And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss. 

But twice or thrice was Proteus written down: 
Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away 
Till I have found each letter in the letter, [bear 
Except mine own name; that some whirlwind 
Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock, 

And throw it thence into the raging sea ! 
lo, here in one line is his name twice writ, — 
Foot forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus, 

To the sweet Juba; that I’ll tear away; 

And yet I will not, sith so prettily 
He couples it to his complainmg names. 

Thus w^ I fold them one upon another; 

How kiss, embrace, contend, do what you wiU. 

Re-enter Lucetta. 

Luc, Madam, dinner’s ready, and your father 
[stays. 

Jul, Well, let us go. 

Luc, What! shall these papers lie like tell- 
tales here? [up. 

Jul. If you respect them, best to take them 
Luc, Nay, I was taken up for laying them 
down; 

Yet here they shall not lie for catching cold. 
Jul. I see you have a month’s mind to them. 
Luc, Ay, madam, you may say what sights 
you see; 

1 see things too, although you judge I wink. 
Jul, Come, come; wilt please you go? 

[Exeunt. 

Scene HI.— TAe same. A Room in 
Antonio’s House, 

Enter Antonio and Panthino. 

Ant, Tell me, Panthmo, what sad talk was 
that 

Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister? 
Pan, *Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son. 
Ant, Why, what of him? 

Pan. He wonder’d that your lordship 

Would suffer him to spend his youth at home. 
While other men, of slender reputation. 

Put forth their sons to seek preferment out: 
Some to the wars, to try their fortune there; 
Some to discover islands far away; 

Some to the studious universities. 

For any, or for all these exercises. 

He said that Proteus, your son, was meet; 

And did request me to importune you 
To let him spend his time no more at home. 
Which would be great impeachment to his age. 
In having known no travel in his youth, [that 
Ant Nor need’st thou much importune me to 
Whereon this month I have been hammering. 
I have consider’d well his loss of time. 

And how he cannot be a perfect man, 

Not being tried and tutor’d in the world: 
Expenence is by industry achieved, 

And perfected by the swift course of time: 
Then tell me, whither were I best to send him? 

Pan, I think your lordship is not ignorant 
How his companion, youthful Valentine, 
Attends the emperor in his royal court. 

Ant I know it well. [him thither: 

Pan, ’TWere good, Ithinfc, your lordship sent 
There shall be practise tdts and tournaments, 


Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen, 
And be in eye of every exercise 
Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth. 

Ant. I like thy counsel; well hast thou advised • 
And that thou may’st perceive how well I like it. 
The execution of it shall make known; 

Even with the speediest execution 
I will dispatch him to the emperor’s court. 

Pan. Tomorrow, may it please you, Don Al- 
With other gentlemen of good esteem, [phonso, 
Are journeying to salute the emperor, 

And to commend their service to his will. 

Ant, Good company; with them shall Pro- 
teus go. [him. 

And — ^in good time; — now will we break with 
Enter Proteus. 

Pro. Sweet love! sweet lines! sweet life! 
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart; 

Here is her oath for love, her honour’s pawn: 
O that our fathers would applaud our loves, 

To seal our happiness with their consents! 

0 heavenly Julia! [there? 

Ant. How now? what letter are you reading 
Pro. May’t please your lordship, ’tis a word or 

Of commendation sent from Valentine, [two 
Dehver’d by a friend that came from him. 

Ant. Lend me the letter; let me see what news. 
Pro. There is no news, my lord; but that he 
wntes 

How happily he lives, how well-beloved 
And daily graced by the emperor; 

Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune. 
Ant, And how stand you affected to his wish? 
Pro. As one relying on your lordship’s will, 
And not depending on his friendly wish. 

Ant. My will is something sorted with his 
wish. 

Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed; 

For what I will, I will, and there an end. 

1 am resolved that thou shalt spend some time 
With Valentinus in the emperor’s court; 

What maintenance he from his friends receives, 
Like exhibition shalt thou have from me. 
Tomorrow be m readiness to go: 

Excuse It not, for I am peremptory. 

Pro. My lord, I cannot be so soon provided; 
Please you, deliberate a day or two. [ after thee : 

Ant. Look, what thou want’st shall be sent 
No more of stay; to-morrow thou must go. — 
Come on, Panthino; you shall be employ’d 
To hasten on his expedition. 

[Exeunf Ant. and Pan. 
Pro. Thus have I shunn’d the fire, for fear of 
burning, [drown’d: 

And drench’d me in the sea, where I am 
I fear’d to show my father Juba’s letter, 

Lest he should take exceptions to my love; 
And with the vantage of mine own excuse 
Hath he excepted most against my love, 

0, how this spring of love resemWeth 
The uncertain glory of an April day; 

Which now shows all the beauty of the sun, 
And by and by a cloud takes all away! 
Re-enter Panthino. 

Pan. Sir Proteus, your father calls for you; 
He is in haste; therefore, I pray you, go. 

Pro. Why, tWs it is ! my heart accords thereto; 
And yet a thousand times it answers no. 



SCEKtE I.] 


TWO GENTLEMEN OP VERONA 


25 


ACT IL 

Scene I. — Milan. An apartment in the 
Duke’s Palace. 

Enter Valentine and Speed. 

Speed. [Picking up a glove.] Sir, your glove. 
Val. Not mine: my ^oves are on. 

Speed, Why, then, this may be yours; for this 
is but one. [mine: — 

Vat, Hal let me see: ay, give it to me; it’s 
Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine I 
Ah, Silvia! Silvia! [Silvia! 

Speed, [Calling.] Madam Silvia! Madam 
Val. How now, sirrah? 

Speed. She is not within hearing, sir. 

Val. Why, sir, who bade you call her? 

Speed. Your worship, sir; or else I mistook. 
Val. Well, you’ll still be too forward. 

Speed, And yet I waslast chiddenforbeingtoo 
slow. [Silvia? 

Val, Go to, sir; teU me, do you know Madam 
Speed. She that your worship loves? 

Val, Why, how know you that I am in love? 
Speed. Marry, by these special marks: first 
you have learned, hke Sir Proteus; to wreath your 
arms like a mal-content; to relish a love-song, 
like a robin redbreast; to walk alone, like one 
that had the pestilence; to sigh, like a school-boy 
that had lost his A B C; to weep, like a young 
wench that had buried her grandam; to fast, like 
one that takes diet; to watch, like one that fears 
robbing; to speak puling, like a beggar at Hal- 
lowmas. Y ou were wont, when you laughed, to 
crow like a cock; when you walked, to walk like 
one of the lions; when you fasted, it was pres- 
ently after dinner; when you looked sadly, it was 
for want of money: and now you are metamor- 
phosed with a mistress, that, when 1 look on 
you, I can hardly think you my master. 

Val. Are all these things perceived in me? 
speed. They are all perceived without you. 
Val, Without me? they cannot. 

Speed, Without you? nay, that’s certain; for, 
without you were so simple, none else would: 
but you arc so without these follies, that these 
ioUies are within you, and shine though you 
like the water in a urmal; that not an eye tiiat 
sees you but is a physician to comment on your 
malady. 

Val, But teE me, dost thou know my lady 
Silvia? 

Speed, She that you gaze on so, as she sits at 
supper? 

Vah Ha8tthouob8ervedthat?eveu8heImean. 
Speed, Why, sir, 1 know her not. 

Kal. Dost thou know her by my gazing on 
her, and yet knowest her not? 

Speed, Is she not hard favoured, sir? 

Val, Not so fair, hoy, as weU favoured* 
Speed. Sir, 1 know that weU enough. 

Val, What dost thou know? 

Speed. That she is not so fair as (of you) well 
favoured. 

Val 1 mean that her heauty is exijuisite, but 
her favour infinite. 

;^edf. That’s because the one is painted and 
the other out of tU count 
Vat, How painted? and how out of count? 
Speed, Marry, sir, so psinted, to make her 
fair, that no man counts of her beauty. 


Val, How esteemest thou me? I account of 
her beauty. 

Speed. You never saw her since she was de- 
formed. 

Val. How long hath she been deformed? 

Speed. Ever since you loved her. 

Val. I have loved her ever smce I saw her; 
and stiE I see her beautiful. 

speed. If you love her, you cannot see her. 

Val. Why? 

Speed. Because love is blind. O that you had 
mine eyes; or your own eyes had the lights they 
were wont to have when you chid at Sir Pro- 
teus for going ungartered I 

Val: What should I see then? 

Speed. Your own present foEy and her pass- 
ing deformity; for he, being in love, cotEd not 
see to garter his hose; and you, bemg in love, 
cannot see to put on your hose. 

Val. Belike, boy, ifiien you are in love; for 
last morning you cohld not see to wipe my shoes. 

Speed. True, sir; I was in love with my bed; 
I thank you, you swinged me for my love, which 
makes me the bolder to chide you for yours. 

Val. In conclusion, I stand affected to her. 

Speed. I would you were set; so your affec- 
tion would cease. 

Val. Last night she enjoined me to write 
some lines to one she loves. 

Speed. And have you? 

Val. I have. 

Speed. Are they not lamely writ? 

Val, No, boy, but as weE as I can do them; — 
Peace; here she comes. 

Speed. 0 ezceUent motion! O exceeding 
puppet! now will he interpret to her. 

Enter Silvia. 

Vd, Madam and mistress, a thousand good- 
morrows. 

Speed. 0, give you good even!-— Here’s a 
miEion of manners. [Asvde, 

Sil. Sir Valentine and servant, to you two 
thousand. 

Speed. He should give her interest, and she 
^ves it to him. [Aside. 

Val. As you enjoin'd me, Ihavewrityour letter 
Unto the secret nameless friend of yours; 
Which I was much unwiEing to proceed in 
But for my duty to your ladyship. 

Sil. 1 thank you, gentie servant; ’tis very 
clerkly done. 

Vd. Now trust me madam, it came hardly off; 
For being ignorant to whom it goes 
I wnt at random, very doubtfuEy. [paint? 

Sil. Perchance you think too much of so much 

Vd. No, madam; so it stead you, I will write, 
Please you command, athousand times as much: 
And yet; — 

SU. AprottyperiodlWeE,Igucssthe sequel; 
And yet I wiE not name it:— 'and yet I care not; — 
And yet take this again; — and yet I thank you; 
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more. 

Speed, And yet you wiE; and yet another yet. 

[Aside. 

Vd, What means your ladyship? do you not 
like it? 

Sil. Yes, yes; the Enea are very quainffy writ: 
But since unwillingly, take them again; 

Nay, take ^«m. [Gives hack the Utter, 



26 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 


[ACT fl. 


Val. Madam, they are for you. 

SiL Ay, ay, you wnt them, sir, at my request; 
But I will none of them; they are for you: 

I would have had them writ more movingly. 
Val. Please you, I’ll write your ladyship 
another. [over; 

' Sil. And when it’s writ, for my sake read it 
And if it please you, so; if not, why, so. 

Val. If it please me, madam I what then? 

Sil. Why, if it please you, take it for your 
labour. 

And so good morrow, servant. [Exit ShVia. 

Spe^d. 0 jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible. 
As a nose on a man’s face, or a weather-cock on 
a steeple I 

My master sues to her; and she hath taught her 
suitor. 

He being her pupil, to become her tutor. 

O excellent device ! was there ever heard a b etter’ 
That my master, being scribe, to himself should 
wnte the etter? 

Val. How now, sir? what are you reasoning 
with yourself? 

Speed. Nay , I was rhyming : ’tis you that have 
the reason. 

Val. To do what? 

Speed. To b e a spokesmanfromMadamSilvia? 
Val. To whom? 

Speed. To yourself: why, she woos you by a 
figure. 

Val. What figure? 

Speed. By a letter, I should say. 

Val. Why, she hath not writ to me? 

Speed. What need she when she hath made 
you write to yourself? Why, do you not perceive 
Val. No, believe me. [the jest? 

Speed. No believing you indeed, sir. But did 
you perceive her earnest? 

Vat, She gave me none except an angry word. 
Speed. Why, she hath given you a letter, 

Val. That’s the letter I writ to her fnend. 
Speed. And that letter hath she deliver’d, 
and there an end. 

Val. I would it were no worse. 

Speed. I’ll warrant you ’tis as well. 

For often you have writ to her; and she, in 
modesty, 

Or else for want of idle time, could not again 
reply; 

Or fearing else some messenger that might her 
mind discover, [her lover . — 

Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto 
All this I speak in print, for in print I found it. — 
Why muse you, sir? ’tis dinner time. 

‘ Val. I have dined. 

Speed. Ay, but hearken, sir; though the 
cameleon Love can feed on the air, I am one 
that am nourished by my victuals, and would 
fain have meat; 0, be not like your mistress; 
be moved, be moved. [Exeunt. 

Scene IL— Verona. A Room in Julia’s 
House, 

Enter Proteus and Jutu^ 

Pro. Have patience, gentle Julia. 

, Jut, I must, where is no remedy. 

■ Pro. When possibly I can I will return. 

Jut. If you turn not you will retufm the sooner; 


Keep this remembrance for thy Julia’s sake. 

[Giving a ring. 

Pro. Why, then, we’ll make exchange; here, 
take you this. 

Jut. And seal the bargain with a holy kiss. 

Pro. Here is my hand for my true constancy; 
And when that hour o’erslips me in the day 
Wherein I sigh not, Julia, for thy sake, 

The next ensuing hour some foul mischance 
Torment me for my love’s forgetfulness! 

My father stays my coming; answer not: 

The tide is now: nay, not thy tide of tears; 
That tide will stay me longer than I should: 

[Fxif Julia. 

Julia, farewell.—What! gone without a word? 
Ay; so true love should do: it cannot speak; 
For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it. 
Enter Panthino. 

Pan. Sir Proteus, you are stay’d for. 

Pro. Go; I come, I come:— • 

Alas! this parting strikes poor lovers dumb. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene III . — The same. A Street. 

Enter Launce, leading a dog. 

Laun. Nay, ’twill be this hour ere I have done 
weeping; all the kind of the Launces have this 
very fault: I have received my proportion, like 
the prodigious son, and am going with Sir Pro- 
teus to the Imperial’s court, I think Crab my 
dog be the sourest-natured dog that lives: my 
mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister 
crying, our maid howhng, our cat wringing her 
hands, and all our house in a great perplexity; 
yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed one tear: 
he is a stone, a very pebble stone, and has no 
more pity in him than a dog: a Jew would have 
wept to have seen our parting; why, my grand- 
am having no eyes, look you, wept herself bUnd 
at my parting. Nay, I’ll show you the manner 
of it: this shoe is my father ;~~no, this left shoe 
is my father; — no, no, this left shoe is my 
mother; nay, that cannot be so neither; yes; it 
is so, it is so ; it hath the worser sole. This shoe 
with the hole in it is my mother, and this my 
father. A vengeance on ’t! there ’tis. Now, 
sir, this staff is my sister; for, look you, she is 
as white as a lily and as small as a wand; this 
hat is Nan our maid; I am the dog;— no, the 
dog is himself, and I am the dog,— 0, the dog 
is me, and I am myself; ay, so, so. Now come 
I to my father; Father, your blessing;-^ now 
should not the shoe speak a word for weeping; 
now should I kiss my father; well, he weeps on: 
—now come I to my mother (0, that she could 
speak now!) like a wood woman;— well, I Mss 
her:--why there ’tis; here’s my mother’s breath 
up and down; now come I to my sister; mark 
the moan she makes: now the dog all tliis while 
sheds not a tear, nor speaks a word; but see 
how I lay the dust with my tears. 

Enter Panthino. 

Pan, Launce, away, away aboard; thy mas- 
ter is shipped, and thou art to post after with 
oars*. What’s the matter! why weep’st thou, 
man? Away, ass; you will lose the tide if you 
tarry any longer. 

Loan. It is no matter if the tied were lost; 



SCENE rvi] 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 


37 


font is the unkindest tied that ever man tied. 

Pan. What’s the unkindest tide? [dog. 

Laun. Why, he that’s tied here: Crab, my 

Pan. Tut, man; 1 mean thou’ltlose the flood: 
and, in losing the flood, lose thy voyage; and, in 
losing thy voyage, lose thy master; and in los- 
ing thy master, lose thy service; and, inlosing 
thy service,— Why dost thou stop my mouth? 

Laun. For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue. 

Pan. Where should I lose my tongue? 

Laun. In thy tale. 

Pan. In thy tale? 

Laun. Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the 
master, and the service? The tidel Why, 
man, if the river were dry, I am able to fill it 
with my tears; if the wind were down, I could 
drive the boat with my sighs. 

Pan. Come, come away, man; I was sent 
to call thee. 

Lam. Sir, call me what thou darest. 

Pan. Wilt thou go? 

Lam. Well, I will go. [Exemt. 

Scene IV. — Milan. An Apartment in the 
Duke’s Palace. 

Enter Valentine, Silvia, Thurio, and 
Speed. 

Sil. Servant — 

Val. Mistress? 

Speed. Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you. 

Val. Ay, boy, it’s for love. 

Spee^. Not of you. 

Val.‘ Of my imstress, then. 

Speed. ’Twere good you knocked him. 

Sil. Servant, you are sad. 

Val. Indeed, madam, I seem so. 

Thu. Seem you that you are not? 

Val. Haply I do. 

Thu. So do counterfeits. 

Val. So do you. 

Thu, What seem I that I am not? 

Val, Wise. 

Thu. What instance of the contrary? 

Val YourfoUy. 

Thu, And how quote you my folly? 

FoZ. I quote it in your jerkin. 

Thu. My jerkin is a doublet. 

Val Well, then, I’ll double your folly. 

Thu. How? 

Sil What, angry, Sir Thurio? do you change 
colour? 

Val. Give Mm leave, madam: he is a kind of 
cameleon. 

Thu. That hath more mind to feed on your 
blood than live in your air. 

Val. You have said, sir. 

Thu. Ay, sir, and done too, for this time. 

Val. I know it well, sir; you always end ere 
you begin. [quickly shot off. 

Sil, A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and 

Val ’Tis indeed, madam; we thank the giver, 

iSi7, Who is that, servant? 

Vat. Yourself, sweet lady; for you gave the 
fire. Sir Thurio borrows his wit from your 
ladysMp’s looks, and spends what he borrows 
kindly in your company, 

Thu. Sir, if you spend word for word vtith 
me, I shall make your wit bankrupt. 

Val X know it well, sir; 'you have an ex- 


chequer of words, and, I think, no other trea- 
sture to ^ve your followers; for it appears by their 
bare liveries that they live by your bare words. 

Sil. No more, gentlemen, no more; here 
comes my father. 

Enter Duke. 

Duke. Now, daughter Silvia, you are hard 
beset. 

Sir Valentine, your father’s in good health: 
What say you to a letter from your fnends 
Of much good news? 

Val My lord, I will be thankful 

To any happy messenger from thence. 

Duke. Know you Don Antonio, your country- 
man? . [man 

Val. Ay, my good lord; I know the gentle- 
To be of worth, and worthy estimation, 

And not without desert so well reputed. 

Duke. Hath he not a son? [serves 

Val Ay, my good lord; a son that well de- 
The honour and regard of such a father, 

Duke. You know Mm well? 

Val Iknewhimasmyself ; forfromourinfancy 
W e have conversed and spent our hours together : 
And though myself have been an idle truant, 
Omittmg the sweet benefit of time 
To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection. 
Yet hath Sir Proteus — for that’s his name— 
Made use and fair advantage of his days; 

His years but young, but his expenence old; 
His head unmellow’d, but Ms judgment ripe; 
And, in a word,— for far behind Ms worth 
Come all the praises that I now bestow,— 

He is complete in feature and in mind, 

With all good grace to grace a gentleman. 

Duke. Beshrew me, sir, but if he make tMs 
He is as worthy for an empress’ love [good, 
As meet to be an emperor’s counsellor. 

Well, sir; tMs gentleman is come to me, 

With commendation from great potentates; 
And here he means to spend Ms time awhile: 

I think ’tis no unwelcome news to you. [he. 
Val Should I have wished athiagithad been, 
Duke. Welcome Mm, then, according to his' 
worth; 

Silvia, I speak to you; and you, Sir Thurio 
For Valentine, I need not ’cite him to it: 

I’ll send Mm hither to you presently. 

[Exit Duke. 

Val This is the gentleman I told your ladyship 
Had come along with me, but that Ms mistress 
Did hold his eyes lock’d in her crystal looks. 

Sil Belike that now she hath enfrancMsed 
Upon some other pawn for fealty. [them 

Val Nay, sure, I think she holds them 
prisoners still. [blind, 

Sil Nay, then, he should be blind; and, being 
How could he see Ms way to seek out you? 
Val Why, lady, love hath twenty pairs of eyes. 
Thu. They say thatlove hath not an eye at all. 
Val To see such lovers, Thurio, as yourself; 
Upon a homely object love can wink. 

Enter Proteus. 

Sil Have done, have done; here comes the 
gentleman. [seech you 

Val W elcome, dear Proteus!— Mistress, Ibe- 
Confinn his welcome, with some special favour. 
Sil His worth is warrant for Ms welcome 
hither, 



38 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VEEONA. 


[Acxn. 


If fhis 1>e lie you oft bave wish’d to hear from. 

VaU Mistress, it is ; sweetlady, entertidu him 
To be my fellow-serrant to your ladyship. 

SiL Too low a mistress for so high a senrant. 
Pro. Notso, sweetlady; buttoomeauaservant 
To have a look of such a wortiiy mistress* 

VaL Leave off discourse of disability: — 
Sweetlady, entertaiu him for your servant. 
Pro. My duty will I boast of, nothing els< 
Sil, And duty never yet did want his meed. 
Serrant, youare welcome toa worthless mistress. 
Pro, I’ll die on him that says so but yourself. 
Sil, That you are welcome? 

Pro. No; that you are worthless. 

Enter Servant. 

Ser. Madam, my lord your father would 
speak with you. 

SU, m wait upon bis pleasure. [Exit Servant. 

Come, Sir Thurio, 
Go withme.'-Once more, new servant, welcome. 
I’ll leave you to confer of home affairs; 

When you have done we look to hear from you. 
Pro, We’ll bolh attend upon your ladyship. 

[Exeunt Sa., Thu., and Spjeeu. 

Vat, Now, tell me, how do all from whence 
you came? [much commended. 
Pro. Your friends are well, and have them 
Val, And how do yours? 

Pro. 1 1 eft them all in health. 

Vai, How does your lady? and how thrives 
your love? 

Pro. My tales of love were wont to weary you; 
I know you joy not in a love discourse. 

V(d, Ay, Proteus; but that life is alter’d now: 
1 have done penance for contemning love; 
Whoselughimperious thoughtshaVe punish’dme 
With bitter fasts, with penitential groans. 

With nightly tears, and daily heart>sore sighs; 
for, in revenge of my contempt of love, 

Love hath chased sleep frommy enthralled eyes. 
And made them watchers of mine own heart’s 
sorrow* 

O, gentle Proteus, love’s a mighty lord; 

And hath so humbled me, as I confess, 

There is no woe to his correction. 

Nor, to his service, no such joy on earthi 
Now no discourse, except it be of love; 

Now can 1 break my fast, dine, sup, and sleep, 
Upon the very naked name of love. 

Pro. Enough; I read your fortune in your eye: 
Was fhis the idol that you worship so? 

Val. Even she; andis shenotaheavenly saint? 
•Pro. No; but she is an earthly paragon. 

Val. Call her divine. 

. Pro, IwiU not flatter her. 

y<tl. 0,flAtter me; for love delights in praises. 
Pro. TOen I was sick you gave me bitter piils, 
And 1 must minister the like to you. 

YaUTkm speak the truth by her; if not divine, 
Yet let her be a principality, 

Sovereim to all Uie creatures on the earth. 

Pro. Except my mistress. 

Vtd, Sweet, except not any. 

Except thou wilt except against my love. 

Pro. Have I not reason to prefer mine own? 
Val. And I will help thee to prefer her too: 
She shall be dignified with this high honour--- 
Ta bear my lady’s train, lest the base earth 
Should from her vesture chance to steal a Mss, 


And, of so great a favour growing proud. 
Disdain to root the summer-swelling flower, 
And make roimh winter everlastingly, [this? 
Pro. Why, Valentine, what braggardism is 
Val, Pardon me, Proteus : all I can is nothing 
To her whose worth makes other worthies 
She is alone. [not^g; 

Pro. Then let her alone. [own; 
Val, Notforthe world; why, man, she is mine 
And I as rich in having such a jewel 
As twenty seas, if all &eir sand were pearl, 
The water nectar, and the rocks pure gold. 
Forgive me that I do not dream on thee 
Because thou seest me dote upon my love. 

My foolish rival, that her father likes 
Only for his possessions are so huge, 

Is gone with her along; and I must after, 

For lov^ thou know’st is full of jealousy. 

Prd. But she loves you? 

Val. Ay, we are betrofli’d: 

Nay, more; our marriage hour, 

With all the cunning manner of our flight, 
Determined of: how I must climb her window. 
The ladder made of cords; and all the means 
Plotted and ’greed on for my happiness. 

Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber. 

In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel. 

Pro. Go on before; I shall inquire you forth: 
I must unto the road to disembark 
Some necessaries that I needs must use; 

And then I’ll presently attend you. 

Val. Will you make haste? 

Pro. I will.— [Exit Val. 

Even as one heat another heat expels, 

Or as one nail by strength drives out another, 
So the remembrance of my former love 
Is by a newer object quite forgotten. 

Is it mine eye, or Valentinus’ praise, 

Her true perfection, or my false transgression. 
That makes me, reasonless, to reason thus? 
She’s f(ur; and so is Julia that 1 love, — 

That I did love, for now my love is thaw’d; 
Which like a waxen image ’gainst afire 
Bears no impression of the thing it was. 
Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold. 

And that 1 love him not as 1 was wont: 

01 but I love his lady too, too much; 

And that’s the reason I love him so little. 

How shall I dote on her with more advice, 
That thus without advice begin to love her? 
*Tis but her picture I have yet beheld, 

And that hath dazzled my reason’s light; 

But when I look on her perfections, 

There is no reason but I shall be blind. 

If I can check my erring love, I will: 

If not, to compass her I’ll use my sMli. [Exit, 

Scene V.— The $ame, A Street, 

Enter Speed and Iaunce. 

Speed. Launcel by mine honesty, welcome 
to Milan. 

Laun. Forswear not thyself, sweet youth; for 
I am nqt welcome. 1 reckon tMs always— •that 
a man ia never undone till he be hanged; nor 
never welcome to a place till some certain shot 
be paid and the hostess say, welcome. 

I^ed. Come on, you madcap; I’ll to the 
ale-house with you presently; where, for one 
shot of flvepence, thou shalt have five thou- 



SCEUE VII.] 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VEBONA 


2g 


sand welcomes. But, sirrah, how did thy 
master part with Madam Juha? 

Laun. Marry, after they closed in earnest 
they parted very fairly in jest. 

Speed. But shall she marry him? 

jCaun. No. 

speed. How, then? shall he marry her? 

Laun. No, neither. 

Speed. What! are they broken? 

iMun. No; they are both as whole as a fish. 

Speed. Why, then, how stands the matter 
with them? 

Laun. Marry, thus; when it stands well 
with him it stands well with her. 

Speed. What an ass art thou? I understand 
thee not. 

Laun. What a block art thou, that thou 
canst not! My staff understands me. 

Speed. What thou say’st? 

Laun. Ay, and what I do, too; look thee, 
I’ll but lean, and my staff understands me. 

Speed. It stands under thee, indeed, [one. 

Laun. Why, stand under and understand is all 

Speed. But tell me true, will’t be a match? 

iMun. Ask my dog: if he say ay, it will; if 
he say no, it will; if he shake his tad and say 
nothing, it will. 

Speed. The conclusion is, then, that it will. 

liaun. Thou shalt never get such a secret 
from me but by a parable. 

Speed. ’Tis well that I get it so. But, 
Launce, how say’st thou — that my master is 
become a notable lover? 

Laun. 1 never knew him otherwise. 

Speed. Then how? 

Laun, A notable lubber as thou reportest 
him to be. 

Speed. Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mis- 
takest me. 

Laun. Why, fool, I meant not thee, I meant 
thy master.’ 

speed. I tell thee, my master is become a 
hot lover. 

Laun. Why, I tell thee I care not though he 
bum himself in love. If thou wilt go with me 
to the ale-house, so; if not, thou art an Hebrew, 
a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian. 

Speed. Why? 

Jjiun. Because thou hast not so much chanty 
in thee as to go to the ale with a Christian. 
Wilt thou go? 

Speed. At thy service. [Exeunt. 

Scene VI.— The same. An Apartment in 
the Palace. 

Enter Proteus. 

Pro. To leave my Julia, shall I be forsworn; 
To love fair Silvia shaU I be forsworn; 

To wrong my friend, 1 shall be much forsworn; 
And even thatpower which gavemefixstmy oath 
Provokes me to this threefold perjury. 

Love bade me swear, and love bids me forswear; 
0 sweet-’suggesting love, if thou hast sinn’d. 
Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it 
At first I did adore a twinkling star, 

But now 1 worship a celestial sun. 

UnheedM vows may heedfuUy be broken; 

And he wants wit that wants resolved will 
To learn his wit to exchange the badfor better, — 
Fie, fie, unreverend tongue! to call her bad. 


Whose sovereignty so oft thou has preferr’d 
With twenty-thousand-soui-confirming oaths. 

I cannot leave to love, and yet I do; 

But there I leave to love where I should love. 
Julia 1 lose, and Valentine I lose: 

If 1 keep them, I needs must lose myself; 

If I lose them, thus find 1 by their loss, 

For Valentine, myself; for Julia, Silvia. 

I to myself am dearer than a friend: 

For love is still more precious m itself: [fair!— 
And Silvia — witness heaven, that made her 
Shows Juha but a swarthy Ethiope. 

1 will forget that Julia is alive, 

Rememb’nng that my love to her is dead; 

And Valentine I’ll hold an enemy. 

Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend. 

I cannot now prove constant to myself 
Without some treachery used to Valentine: — 
This mght he meaneth with a corded ladder 
To climb celestial Silvia’s chamber-window — 
Myself in counsel, his competitor; 

Now presently I’ll give her father notice 
Of their disgmsing and pretended Bight; 

Who, all enraged, will banish Valentine; 

For Thurio, he intends, shall wed his daughter: 
But, Valentine, being gone, I’ll quickly cross, 
By some sly trick, blunt Thuno’s dull proceeding. 
Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift. 
As thou hast lent me wit to plot tlus drift! [Exit, 

Scene VII.— Verona, i Room in Julu’s 
House. 

Enter Julia and Lucetta. 

Jul, Counsel, Lucetta! gentle girl, assist me! 
And, even in kmd love, I do conjure thee, — * 
Who art the table wherein all my thoughts 
Are visibly character’d and engraved, — 

To lesson me; and tell me some good mean. 
How, with my honour, I may undertake 
A journey to my loving Proteus. 

Luc. Alas! the way is wearisome and long. 
Jul* A truenievoted pilgrim is not weary 
To measure kingdoms wiffi his feeble steps; 
Much less shall she that hath love’ s wings to fly. 
And when the flight is made to one so dear, 

Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus. 

Luc, Better forbear till Proteus make return. 
Jul, O, know’st thou not his looks are my 
soul’s food? 

Pity the dearth that I have pined in 
By longing for that food so long a time. 

Didst thou but know the inly touch of love, 
Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow 
As seek to quench the fire of love with words. 

Luc. I do not seek to quench your love’s hot 
But qualify the fire’s extreme rage, [fire; 
Lest It should bum above the bounds of reason. 
Jul. The more thou damm’st it up, the more 
it bums; 

The current that with gentle murmur glides, 
Thou know’st, being stopp’d, impatiently doth 
rage; 

But when his fair course is not hindered 
He makes sweetmusic with the enamell’d stones. 
Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge 
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage; 

And so by many winding nooks he strays, 
With willing sport, to the wUd ocean. 

Then let me go, and hinder not my course: 



30 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 


[act hi. 


I’ll be as patient as a gentle stream, 

And make a pastime of each weary step, 

Till the last step have brought me to my love; 
And there Pll rest as, after much turmoil, 

A blessed soul doth in Elysium. 

Luc- But in what habit will you go along? 
Jul Not like a woman; for I would prevent 
The loose encounters of lascivious men; 

Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds 
As may beseem some well-reputed page. [hair. 
Luc. Why, then, your ladyship must cut your 
Jul. No, girl; I’ll knit it up in silken stnngs, 
With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots: 

To be fantastic may become a youth 
Of greater time than I shall show to be. 

Luc. What fashion, madam, shall I make 
your breeches? [lord, 

Juh That fits as well as— “ Tell me, good my 
What compass will you wear your farthingale?” 
Why, even that fashion thou best lik’st, Lucetta. 
Luc. You must needs have them with a cod- 
piece, madam. 

Jul. Out, out, Lucetta ! that will be ill-favour’d, 
Luc. A round hose, madam, now’s not worth 
a pm, 

Unless you have a cod-piece to stick pms on. 

Jul. Lucetta, as thou lov’st me, let me have 
What thou think’ St meet, and is most mannerly: 
But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me 
For undertaking so unstaid a journey? 

I fear me it will make me scandahz’d. [go not. 
Luc. If you thmk so, then stay at home, and , 
Jul Nay, that I will not. 

Luc. Then never dream on infamy, but go. 

If Proteus like your journey when you come, 
No matter who’s displeas’d when you are gone: 

1 fear me he will scarce be pleased withal. 

Jut. That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear: 

A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears, 

And instances as infinite of love, 

Warrant me welcome to my Proteus. 

Luc. All these are servants to deceitful men. 
Jut. Base men, that use them to so base effect ! 
But truer stars did govern Proteus’ birth: 

His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles; 

His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate; 

His tears pure messengers sent from his heart; 
His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth. 
Luc. Pray heaven he prove so when you 
come to himl [wrong, 

Jul, Now, as thou lov’st me, do him not that 
To bear a hard opinion of his truth; 

Only deserve my love by loving him, 

And presently go with me to my chamber, 

To take a note of what I stand in need of 
To furnish me upon my longing journey. 

Ail that IS mine I leave at thy dispose, 

My goods, ray lands, my reputation; 

Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence: 

Come, answer not, but to it presently; 

I am impatient of ray tarriance. [Exeunt 

ACT m. 

Scene I.— Milan. An Ante-room in the 
Duke’s Palace. 

Enter Duke, Thurio, and Proteus. 

Duke. Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, awhile; 
We have some secrets to confer about. 

[Exit Thurio, 


Now, teU me, Proteus, what’s your will with 
me? 

Pro. My gracious lord, that which I would 
[discover, 

The law of friendship bids me to conceal; 

But, when I call to mind your gracious favours 
Done to me, undeserving as I am. 

My duty pncks me on to utter that [me. 
Which else no worldly good should draw from 
Know, worthy pnnce, Sir Valentine, my friend, 
This night intends to steal away your daughter; 
Myself am one made privy to the plot. 

I know you have determined to bestow her 
On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates; 
And should she thus be stolen away from you. 
It would be much vexation to your age. 

Thus, for my duty’s sake, I rather chose 
To cross my friend in his intended drift, 

Than, by concealing it, heap on your head 
A pack of sorrows, which would press you down, 
Being unprevented, to your timeless grave. 
Duke. Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest 
care; 

Which to requite, command me while I live. 
This love of theirs myself have often seen, 
Haply when they have judged me fast asleep; 
And oftentimes have purposed to forbid 
Sir Valentine her company and my court: 

But, fearmg lest my jealous aim might err, 

And so, unworthily, disgrace the man, — 

A rashness that I ever yet have shunn'd, — 

I gave him gentle looks; thereby to find 
That which thyself hast now disclos’d to me. 
And, that thou may’st perceive my fear of this, 
Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested, 

I nightly lodge her m an upper tower, 

The key whereof myself have ever kept; 

And thence she cannot be conveyed away, [mean 
Pro. Know, noble lord, they have devised a 
How he her chamber-window will ascend, 

And with a corded ladder fetch her down; 

For which the youthful lover now is gone, 

And this way comes he with it presently; 
Where, if it please you, you mayinterccpt him. 
But, good my lord, do it so cunningly, 

That my discovery be not aimed at; 

For love of you, not hate unto my friend, 

Hath made me publisher of this pretence. 

Duke. U pon mine honour, he shall never know 
That I had any light from thee of this, 

Pro, Adieu, my lord; Sir Valentine is com- 
ing. [Exit. 

Enter Valentine, 

Duke. Sir Valentine, whither away so fast? 
Val. Please it your grace, there is a messenger 
That stays to bear my letters to my friends, 
And I am going to deliver them. 

Duke. Be they of much import? 

Val. The tenor of them doth but signify 
My health and happy being at your court 
Duke. Nay, then, no matter; stay with me 
awhile; 

I am to break with thee of some affairs 
That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret, 
’Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought 
To match my friend, Sir Thurio, to my daughter. 
Val. I know it well, my lord; and, sure, the 
match iman 

Were rich and honourable; besides, the gentle- 



TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 


31 


Is ftill of virtue, bounty, worth, and qualities 
Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter: 
Cannot your grace win her to fancy him? 
Buke, No, trust me; she is peevish, sullen, 
froward, 

Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty; 
Neither regarding that she is ray child 
Nor fearing me as if I were her father: 

And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers. 
Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her; 
And, where I thought the rehmant of mine age 
Should have been cherished by her child-like 
duty, 

I am now full resolved to take a wife. 

And turn her out to who will take her in: 

Then let her beauty be her wedding-dower; 
For me and ray possession she esteems not. 
Val, What would your grace have me to do 
in this? 

Duke, There is a lady, sir, in Milan, here, 
Whom I affect; but she is nice, and coy. 

And nought esteems my aged eloquence: 

Now, therefore, would I have thee to mytutor,— 
For long agone I have forgot to court: 

Besides, the fashion of the time is chang’d; — 
How and which way I may bestow myself. 

To be regarded in her sun-bnght eye. 

Val. Winher with gifts, if she respect not words; 
Dumb jewels often, in their silent kind. 

More than quick words do move a woman’s mind. 
Duke. But she did scorn a present that I sent 
her. [contents her: 

Val. A woman sometimes scorns what best 
Send her another; never give her o’er; 

For scorn at first makes after-love the more. 

If she do frown, ’tis not in hate of you, 

But rather to beget more love in you: 

If she do chide, ’tis not to have you gone; 

For why, the fools are mad if left alone. 

Take no repulse whatever she doth say: 

For, get you gone, she doth not mean away: 
Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces; 
Thoughne’ersoblack,saytheyhaveangels’faces. 
That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man, 
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman. 
Duke. But she 1 mean is promised by her 
friends 

Unto a youthful gentleman of worth; 

And kept severely from resort of men, 

That no man hath access by day to her. 

Val. Why, then, I would resort to her by night, 
Duke, Ay, but the doors be lock’d, and keys 
kept safe, 

That no man hath recourse to her by night, 
Val. What lets but one may enter at her 
window? [ground; 

Duke. Her chamber is aloft, far from the 
And built so shelving, that one cannot climb it 
Without apparent hazard of his life. [cords, 
Val Why, then, a ladder, quaintly made of 
To cast up with a pair of anchoring hooks, 
Would serve to scale another Hero’s tower, 

So bold Leander would adventure it. 

Duke. Now, as thou art a gentleman of blood. 
Advise me where I may have such a ladder. 
Val When would you use it? pray, sir, teU me 
that, 

Duke, This very night; M love is like a child, 
That longs for'everything that he can come.by. 
Vail. Byseveno’clockragctyouauchaladder. 


Duke. But, hark thee; I will go to her alone; 
How shall I best convey the ladder thither? 
FoZ. It will be light, my lord, that you may 
bear it 

Under a cloak that is of any length. [turn. 
Duke. A cloak as long as thine will serve the 
Val Ay, my good lord. 

Duke. Then let me see thy cloak: 

I’ll get me one of such another length, [lord. 
Val Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my 
Duke. How shall I fashion me to wear a 
cloak? — 

I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.— 
What letter is this same? What’s here?— To 
Silvia? 

And here an engine fit for my proceeding! 

I’ll be so bold to break the se^ for once. [Reads. 
My thoughts do harbour with my Silvia nightly; 

And sla ves they are to me, that send themfiying. 
O, could their master come and go as lightly, 
Himself wouldlodge where senseless they are 
lying. 

My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them. 
While I, their king, that thither them importune. 
Do curse the grace that with such grace hath 
blessed them. 

Because myself do want my servants* fortune: 
I curse myself, for they are sent by me, 

That they should harbour where their lord 
should be. 

What’s here? 

Sdvia, this night I will enfranchise thee: 

’Tis so; and here’s the ladder for the purpose 
Why, Phaeton, — for thou art Merops’ son, — 
Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car. 
And with thy daring foUy burn the world? 

Wilt thou reach stars because they shine on thee? 
Go, base intruder! over-weening slave! 

Bestow thy fawmng smiles on equal mates; 
And think my patience, more than thy desert, 
Is privilege for thy departure hence: 

Thank me for this, more than for all the favours 

Which, all too much, I have bestow’d on thee. 

But if thou linger in my territories 

Longer than swiftest expedition 

Will give thee time to leave our royal court, 

By heaven, my wrath shall far exceed the love 
I ever bore my daughter or thyself. 

Begone, I will not hear thy vain excuse. 

But, as thou lov’st thy life, make speed from 
hence. [Exit Duke. 

Val And why not death, rather than living 
torment? 

To die is to be bamsh’d from myself; 

And Silvia is myself: banish’d from her 
Is self from self: a deadly banishment! 

What light is light if Silvia be not seen? 

What joy is joy if Silvia be not by? 

Unless it be to think that she is by. 

And feed upon the shadow of perfection. 
Except I be by Silvia in the night 
There is no music in the nightingale; 

Unless 1 look on Silvia in the day 
There is no day for me to look upon: 

She is my essence; and 1 leave to he. 

If 1 be not by her fair influence 
Foster’d, illumined, cbeiiah’d, kept alive. 

I fly nSt death to fly his deadly doom: 

Tarry 1 here I but attend on death; 

But fly I hence I fly away from life* 



32 


TWO GENTLEMEN OP VERONA 


{ACTln,] 


Enter Proteus and Lacnce. 

Pro. Run, boy, run, run, and seok him out. 
Lam. So-hotso-hoT 
Pro. What seest thou? 

Laun, Him we go to find: there’s not a hair 
on’s head but ’tis a Valentine. 

Pro. Valentine? 

Val No. 

Pro, Who then? his spirit? 

Val Neither. 

Pro. What then? 

Val Nothing. [strike? 

Laun. Can nothing speak? master, shall I 
Pro. Whom wouldst thou strike? 

Laun. Nothing. 

Pro. Villain, forbear. (you,— 

Laun. Why, sir, I’ll strike nothing: I pray 
Pro. Sirrah, I say, forbear; Friend Valentine, 
a word. [good news, 

Vdl. My ears are stopp’d, and cannot hear 
So much of had already hath possess’d them. 

Pro. Then in dumb silence will I bury mine, 
For they are harsh, untuneable, and bad. 

Val Is Silvia dead? 

Pro. No, Valentine. 

Val No Valentine, indeed, for sacred Silvia! — 
Hath she forsworn me? 

Pro. No, Valentine. [me! — 

Val No Valentine, if Silvia have forsworn 
What is your news? 

Laun. Sir, there’s a proclamation that you 
are vanish’d. [news; 

Pro. That thou art banished; 0, that’s the 
From hence, from Silvia, and from me thy fnend. 

VcA, 0, 1 have fed upon this woe already, 
And now excess of it will make me surfeit. 
Doth Silvia know that I am banished? 

Pro. Ay, Ay; and she hath offer’d to the 
doom,— 

Which, unreversed, stands in effectual force, — 
A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears: 
Those at her father’s churlish feet she tender’d 
With them, upon her knees, her humble self; 
Wnnging her hands, whose whiteness so be- 
came them. 

As if but now they waxed pale for woe: 

But neither bended knees, pure hands held up, 
Sad sighs, deep groans, norsilver-sheddingtears. 
Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire; 

But Vdentme, if he be ta’en, must die. 
Besides, her intercession chafed him so, 

When she for thy repeal was suppliant, 

That to close prison he commanded her, 

With many bitter threats of ’biding there. 

Val No more; unless the next word that 
thou speak’st 

Have some malignant power upon my life: 

If so, I pray thee, breath it in mine ear, 

As ending anthem of my endless dolour, [help. 
Pro. Cease to lament for that thou canst not 
And study help for that which thou lament’st. 
Time is the nurse and breeder of all good. 

Here if thou stay thou canst not see thy love; 
Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life. 

Hope is a lover’s staff; walk hence with that. 
And manage it against despairing thoughts. 
Thy letters may be here though thou art hence: 
Which, being writ to me, shall be deliver’d 
Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love. 


The rime now serves not to expostulate: 
Come, I’ll convey thee through the city gate; 
And, ere I part with thee, confer atlarge 
Of all that may concern thy love affairs: 

As thou lov’st Silvia, though not for thyself, 
Regard thy danger, and along viiith me. 

Val I pray thee, Launce, an if thou seest 
my boy, [gate. 

Bid him make haste and meet me at the north 
Pro. Go,* sirrah, find him out. Come, 
Valentine. 

Val, O my dear Silvia, hapless Valentine! 

[Exeunt Val. and Pro. 
Laun. I am but a fool, look you; and yet I 
have the wit to think my master is a kind of 
knave : but that’s all one if he be but one knave . 
He lives not now that knows me to be in love: 
yet I am in love; but a team of horse shall not 
pluck that from me; nor who ’tis I love, and 
yet ’tis a woman: but what woman I will not 
tell myself; and yet *tis a milkmaid; yet *tis 
not a maid, for she hath had gossips : yet *tis a 
maid, for she is her master’s maid, and serves 
for wages. She hath more qualities than a 
water-spaniel, — which is much in a bare Chris- 
tian. Here is the cat-log [PuKmp out a paper] 
of her conditions- Imprimis, She can fetch and 
carry. Why, a horse can do no more; nay, a 
horse cannot fetch, but only carry: therefore is 
she better than a jade. Item, She can mitk; 
look you, a sweet virtue in a maid with clean 
hands. 

Enter Speed. 

Speed. How now, Signior Launce? what news 
with your mastership? 

Laun. With my master’s ship? why, it is at sea. 
Speed. Well, your old vice still; mistake the 
word. 

What news, then, in your paper? [hcard’st. 
Laun. The blackest news that ever thou 
Speed. Why, man, how black? 

Laun. Why, as black as ink. 

Speed. Let me read them. [read. 

iMun. Fie on thee, jolthead; thou caxist not 
Speed, Thou Uest, I can. 

Zaun. 1 will try thee: Tell me this: Who 
begot thee? 

Speed. Marry, the son of my grandfather, 
laun. 0 illiterate loiterer! it was the son of 
thy grandmother: this proves that thou canst 
not read. 

Speed. Come, fool, come : try me in thy paper. 
Laun. There; and St, Nicholas be thy speedl 
Speed. Imprimus, She can milk, 

Laun. Ay, that she can. 

Speed, Item, She brews good ale. 

Zaun. And thereof comes the proverb,— 
Blessing of your heart, you brew good ale. 
Speed. Item, She can sew. 
laun. That’s as much as to say, can she so? 
Speed. Item, She can knit, 

Laun. What need a man care for a stock 
with a wench, when she can knit him a stock. 
Speed. Item, She can umh and scour. 

Laun. A special virtue; for then she need 
not be washed and scoured. 

Speed. Item, She can spin, 

Laun, Then may I set the world on wheels, 
when she can spin for her living. 



SCENE I.J 


TWO GENTLEMEN OP VEEONA 


33 


speed. Item, She hath many nameless virtues. 
Laun, That’s as much as to say, bastard 
virtues; that, indeed, know not their fathers, 
and therefore have no names. 

Speed. Here follow her mces. 

Lam, Close at the heels of her virtues. 
Speed. Item, She is not to be kissed fasting^ 
in respect of her breath. 

Laun. Well, that fault may be mended with 
a breakfast. Read on. 

Speed. Item, She hath a sweet mouth. 

Laun. Thatmakes amends f orher sourbreath. 
Speed. Item, She doth talk in her sleep. 
laun. It’s no matter for that, so she sleep 
not in her talk. 

Speed. Item, She is slow in words. 

Laun. O villain, that set this down among 
her vices! To be slow in words is a woman’s 
only virtue: I pray thee, out with’t; and place 
it for her chief virtue. 

Speed, Item, She is proud. 

Laun. Out with that too; it was Eve’s 
legacy, and cannot be ta’en from her. 

Speed. Item, She hath no teeth. 

Laun. I care not for that neither, because I 
love crusts. 

Speed, Item, She is curst. 

J^n. Well; the best is, she hath no teeth to 
bite. 

Speed. Item, She will often praise her liquor. 
Laun. If her liquor be good, she shall: if 
she will not, I wiU; for good things should be 
praised. 

Speed. Item, She is too liberal. 

Laun. Of her tongue she cannot; for that’s 
writ down she is slow of; of her purse she 
shall not; for that I’ll keep shut; now of an- 
other thing she may; and that I cannot help. 
Well, proceed. 

Speed. Item, She hath more hair than wit, 
and more faults than hairs, and more wealth 
than faults. 

Laun. Stop there; I’ll have her: she was 
mine, and not nune, twice or thrice in that last 
article. Rehearse that once more. 
speed. Item, She hath more hair than wit , — 
laun. More hair than wit, — it may be; I’ll 
prove it: The cover of the salt hides the salt, 
and therefore it is more than the salt; the hair 
that covers the wit is more than the wit; for the 
greater hides the less. What’s next? 
speed. — And more faults than hairs , — 

Mm. That’s monstrous: O, that that were 
out! 

Speed.’—And more wealth than faults. 

Laun. Why, that word makes the faults 
gracious. Well, I’U have her: and if it be a 
match, as nothing is impossible. 

Speed. What then? 

Mun. Why, then wiU I tell thee,— that thy 
master stays for thee at the north gate. 

Speed. Forme? 

Laun. For thee? ay: who art thou? he hath 
stay’d for a better man than thee. 

Speed, And must I go to him? 

Mun. Thou must run to him, for thou hast 
sta/dsolongthatgolngwUlscarceservethetum. 

Speed. Why didst not tell me sooner? ’pox 
of your love-letters! [Exit. 

Laun. Now will be be swinged for reading 


my letter. An unmannerly slave that will thrust 
himself into secrets!— I’U after, to rejoice m the 
boy’s correction. [Exii. 

Scene II . — The same. A Room in the 
Duke’s Palace. 

Enter Duke and Thurio; Proteus behind. 

Duke. Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will 
love you 

Now Valentine is banish’d from her sight. 

Thu. Since his exile she hath despised me 
most, 

Forsworn my company and rail’d at me, 

That I am desperate of obtaining her. 

Duke. This weak impress of love is as a figure 
Trenched in ice; which with an hour’s heat 
Dissolves to water and doth lose his form. 

A Uttle time wiU melt her frozen thoughts, 
And worthless Valentine shaU be forgot.-— 
How now, Sir Proteus? Is your countryman, 
According to our proclamation, gone? 

Pro. Gone, my good lord. 

Duke. My daughter takes his going grievously. 
Pro. A little time, my lord, wiU kill that grief. 
Duke. So I believe; but Thurio thinks not so. — 
Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee.— 

For thou hast shown some sign of good desert, — 
Makes me the better to confer with thee. 

Pro. Longer than I prove loyal to your grace, 
Let me not five to look upon your grace, [effect 
Duke. Thou know’st, how willingly, I would 
The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter. 
Pro. I do, my lord. 

Duke. And also I think, thou art not ignorant 
How she opposes her against my will. 

Pro. She did, my lord, when Valentine was 
here. 

Duke. Ay, and perversely she persevers so. 
What might we do to make the girl forget 
The love of Valentine and love Sir Thuno? 

Pro. The best way is to slander Valentine 
With falsehood, cowardice, and poor, descent; 
Three things that women highly bold in bate. 
Duke. Ay, but she’ll think that it is spoke in 
hate. 

Pro. Ay, if his enemy deliver it: 

Therefore it must with circumstance, be spoken 
By one whom she esteemeth as his friend, [him, 
Duke. Then you must undertake to slander 
Pro. And that, my lord, I shall be loth to do: 
’Tis an ill oflice for a gentleman; 

Especially against his very friend, [tage him 
Duke. Where your good word cannot advan- 
Your slander never can endamage him; 
Therefore, the oflB.ce is indifferent. 

Being entreated to it by your friend. [it 

Pro. You have prevail’d, my lord: if I can do 
By aught that I can speak m his dispraise, 

She shall not long continue love to him. 

But say this weed her love from Valentine, 

It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio. 
Thu. Therefore, as you unwind her love 
from him* 

Lest it should ravel, and be good to none, 

You must provide to bottom it on me: 

Which must be done by praising me as much 
As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine. 

Duke. And, Proteus, we dare trust you in 
this kind; 



34 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 


[act IV, 


Because we know, on Valentine’s report, 

You are already love’s firm votary, 

And cannot soon revolt and change your mind. 
Upon this warrant shall you have access. 
Where you with Silvia may confer at large; 
For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy, 

And, for your friend’s sake, will he glad of you; 
Where you may temper her hy your persuasion 
To hate young Valentine and love my friend. 

Pro. As much as I can do I will effect: — 
But you, Sir Thurio, are not sharp enough; 
You must lay lime to tangle her desires 
By wailful sonnets, whose composed rhymes 
Should be full fraught with serviceable vows. 
Duke, Ay, much the force of heaven-bred 
poesy. 

Pro. Say that upon the altar of her beauty 
You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart; 
Write till your ink be dry; and with your tears 
Moist it again; and frame some feeling Ime 
That may discover such integrity: 

For Orpheus’ lute was strung with poets’ sinews ; 
Vf^ose golden touch could soften steel and 
stones. 

Make tigers tame and hugh leviathans 
Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands, 
After your dire lamenting elegies, 

Visit by night your lady’s chamber-window 
With some sweet concert; to their instruments 
Tune a deploring dump; the night’s dead silence 
Will weU become such sweet complaining griev- 
ance. 

This, or else nothing, will inherit her. 

Duke, This discipline shoWs thou hast been 
in love. [practice: 

Thu. And thy advice this night I’ll put in 
Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver, 
Let us into the city presently 
To sort some gentlemen well skill’d in music: 
I have a soimet that will serve the turn 
To give the onset to thy good advice. 

Duke. About it, gentlemen. [supper; 

Pro. We’ll wait upon your grace till after 
And afterward determine our proceedings. 
Duke, Even now about it; I will pardon you. 

[Exeunt. 

ACT IV. 

Scene I.— A Forest near Mantua. 

Enter certain Outlaws. 

X. Out. Fellows, stand fast; I see a passenger. 
3 Out. If there be ten, shrink not, but down 
with ’em. 

Enter Valentine and Speed. 

3 Out. Stand, sir, and throw us that you 
have about you; 

If not, we’ll make you sit, and rifie you. 

Speed, Sir, we are undone 1 these are the 
villains 

That all the travellers do fear so much. 

Vai. My friends, — 

I Out. Thafsjnot so,sir;'we are your enemies, 
a Out. Peace; we’ll hear him. 

3 Out, Ay, by my beard, will we; 

For he’s a proper man. , [lose; 

Vai. Then know that I have little wealth to 
A man I am crossed with adversity; 


My riches are these poor habiliments, 

Of which if you should here disfurnish me. 
You take the sum and substance that I have. 

2 Out. Whither travel you? 

Val. To Verona. 

I Out. Whence came you? 

Val. From Milan. 

3 Out. Have you long sojourn’d there? 

Val, Some sixteen months; and longer might 
have stay’d 

H crooked fortune had not thwarted me. 

1 Out. Whatl were you banish’d thence? 

Vat. I was. 

2 Out. For what offence? [hearse; 

Val. For that which now torments me to re- 

I kill’d a man, whose death I much repent; 

But yet I slew him manfully in fight, 

Without false vantage or base treachery. 

1 Out. Why, ne’er repent it, if it were done so. 
But were you banish’d for so small a fault? 

Val. I was, and held me glad of such a doom. 

2 Out. Have you the tongues? [happy; 
Val. My youthful travel therein made me 

Or else I often had been miserable. [friar, 

3 Out. By the bare scalp of Robin Hood’s fat 
This fellow were a king for our wild faction. 

1 Out. We’ll have him; sirs, a word. 

Speed. Master, be one of them; 

It is an honourable kind of thievery. 

Val. Peace, vUlain! [take to? 

2 Out. Tell us this. Have you an^hing to 

Val. Nothing but my fortune. [men; 

3 Out. Know, then, that some of us are gentle- 
Such as the fury of ungovem’d youth 
Thrust from the company of awful men: 
Myself was from Veiona banish’d 

For practising to steal away a lady, 

An heir, and near alhed unto the duke. 

2 Out. And 1 from Mantua, for a gentleman, 
Whom, in mfmood, I stabb’d unto the heart. 
X Out. And I for such like petty crimes as 
these. 

But to the purpose,— for we cite our faults 
That they may hold excused our lawless lives,— 
And, partly, seeing you are beautified 
With goodly shape, and by your own report 
A linguist, and a man of such perfection 
As we do in our quality much want; — 

2 Out. Indeed, because you are a banish’d 

man, 

Therefore, above the rest, we parley to you. 
Are you content to be our general? 

To make a virtue of necessity, 

And live, as we do, in this wilderness?, 

3 Out. What say’st thou? wilt thou be of our 

consort? 

Say ay, and be the captain of us aU; 

We’ll do thee homage, and be ruled hy thee, 
Love thee as our commander and onr Mng. 

X Out. But if thou scorn our courtesy tibou 
diest. [have offer’d. 

2 Out. Thou shalt not live to brag what we 
Val. I take your offer, and will live with yon, 

Provided that you do no outrages 
On silly women or poor passengers. , 

3 Out. No; we detest such vile base practises. 
Come,-go with us, we’ll bring thee to our crews, 
And show thee all the treasure we have got; 
Which, wifib ourselves, ah rest at thy dispose. 

[Exeunt. 



SCENE 11.] 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VEBONA 


35 


Scene II. — Milan. Court of the Palace. 
Enter Proteus. 

Pro. Already have I been false to Valentine, 
And now I must be as unjust to Thurio. 
Under the colour of commending him 
I have access my own love to prefer; 

But Silvia is too fair, too true, too holy. 

To be corrupted vsrith my worthless gifts. 
When I protest true loyalty to her 
She twits me with my falsehood to my friend: 
When to her beauty I commend my vows 
She bids me think how I have been forsworn 
In breaking faith with Juha whom I loved: 
And, notwithstanding all her sudden quips, 
The least whereof would quell a lover’s hope, 
Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love 
The more it grows, and fawneth on her still. 
But here comes Thurio: now must we to her 
window, 

And give some evening music to her ear. 
Enter Thurio and Musicians. 

Thu. How now, Sir Proteus? are you crept 
before us? [love 

Pro. Ay, gentle Thurio; for you know that 
Will creep in service where it cannot go. [here. 
Thu. Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not 
Pro. Sir, but I do; or else 1 would be hence. 
Thu. Whom? Silvia? 

Pro. Ay, Silvia— for your sake. [men, 
Thu. I thank you for your own. Now, gentle- 
let’s tune, and to it lustily awhile. 

Enter Host, at a distance; and Julia, in 
hoy's clothes. 

Host. Now, my young guest! methinks 
you’re allycholly; I pray you, why is it? 

Jul. Marry, mine host, because I cannot be 
merry. 

Host. Come, we’ll have you merry: I’ll bring 
you where you shall hear music, and see the 
gentleman that you ask’d for. 

Jul. But shall I hear him speak? 

Host. Ay, that you shall. 

Jul. That will be music. [ilfua/c plays. 
Host. Hark! hark! 

Jul. Is he among these? 

Host. Ay; but peace, let’s hear ’em. 

SONG. 

Who IS Silvia? what is she, 

That all our swains commend her? 

Holy, fair, and wise is she, 

The heavens such grace did lend her, 
That she might admired he. 

Is she kind as she is fair? 

For beauty lives with kindness : 

Love doth to her eyes repair, 

To help Mm of his blindness; 

And, bemg help’d, inhabits there. 

Then to Silvia, let us smg, 

That Silvia is excelling; 

She excels each mortal thing 
Upon the dull earth dwellmg. 

To her let us garknds brmg. 

Host. How now? are you sadder than you 
were before? 

How do you, man! the music likes you not, 

Jul. You mistake ; the musician likes me not. 
Host Why, my pretty youth? 

Jul. He plays false, father. 

Host How! out of tune on the.strings? 


Jul. Not so; hut yet false that he grieves 
my very heart-sbrings. 

Host You have a quick ear. 

Jid. Ay, I would I were deaf! it makes me 
have a slow heart. ’ 

Host I perceive you delight not in music. 
Jul. Not a whit^ when it jars so. 

Host Hark, what fine change is in the music. 
Jul. Ay; that change is the spite. 

Host. You would have them always play but 
one thing? [thing. 

Jul. I would always have one play but one 
But, host, doth this Sir Proteus, that we talk 
on, often resort unto this gentlewoman? 

Host. I’ll tell you what, Launce, his man, 
told me he loved her out of all nick. 

Jul. Where is Latfnce? 

Host Gone to seek his dog; which, tomor- 
row, by his master’s command, he must carry 
for a present to his lady. 

Jul. Peace! stand aside 1 the company parts. 
Pro. Sir Thuno, fear not you! I v^so plead 
That you shall say my cunning drift excels. 
Thu. Where meet we? 

Pro. At Saint Gregory’s well. 

Thu. Farewell. 

Exeunt Thurio and Musicians, 
Silvia appears above, at her window. 

Pro. Madam, good even to your ladyship. 

Sil. I thank you for your music, gentlemen: 
Who is that that spake? [truth, 

Pro. One, lady, if you knew his pure heart’s 
You’d quickly learn to know him by his voice 
Sil. Sir Proteus, as I take it, [vant. 

Pro. Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your ser- 
Sil. What is your will? 

Pr. That I may compass yours. 

Sil. You have your wish; my willis even this,— 
That presently you hie you home to bed, 

Thou subtle, perjured, false, disloyal man! 
Tbink’st thou I am so shallow, so conceitless^ 
To be seduced by thy flattery,^ 

That hast deceived so many with thy vows? 
Return, return, and make tiliy love amends. 

For me, — by this pale queen of night I swear 
I am so far from granting thy request 
That I despise thee for thy wron^ul suit, 

And by and by intend to chide myself 
Even for this time, I spend in talfemg to thee. 

Pro. I grant, sweet love, that I did love a 
But she is dead. *[lady; 

Jul. ’Twere false if I should speak it; 

For I am sure she is not buried, [Asufe. 

Stl. Say that she be; yet Valentine, thy friend 
Survives; to whom, thyself art witness, 

I am betrothed. And art thou not ashamed 
To wrong him with thy importunacy? 

Pro. 1 likewise hear that Valentine is dead. 
Sit And so suppose am I; for in his grave 
Assure thyself my love is buned. 

Pro. Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth. 
Sit Go to thy lady’s grave, and call hers 
thence; 

Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine. 

Jut He heard not that, [Aside. 

Pro. Madam, if your heart be so obdurate, 
Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love; 
The picture that is hanging in your chamber; 
To that I’ll speak, to that I’ll sigh and weep: 



36 


TWO GENTLEMEN OP VERONA 


[act IV. 


For, since the substance of your perfect self 
Is else devoted, I am but a shadow: 

And to your shadow I will make true love. 

Jul If *twcre a substance, you would, sure, 
deceive it. 

And make it but a shadow, as I am. [Aside. 

Sil. 1 am very loth to be your idol, sir; 

But, since your falsehood shall become you well 
To worship shadows and adore false shapes. 
Send to me in the morning, and I'll send it: 
And so, good rest. 

Pro. As wretches have o’er-night. 

That wait for execution in the mom. 

[Exeunt Fro., and Sil., from above. 
Jul. Host, will you go? 

Host. By my hallidom, I was fast asleep. 

Jul. Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus? 

Host. Marry, at my house. Tmst me, 1 
think ’tis almost day. 

Jul. Not so; but it hath been the longest night 
That e*er I watch’d, and the most heaviest. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene lit— The same. 

Enter Eglamour. 

Egl. This is the hour that Madam Silvia 
Entreated me to call and know her mind; 
There’s some great matter she’d employ me in. 
Madam, madam! 

SiLVU appears uhoue, at her window. 

Stl. Who calls? 

Egl. Your servant and your friend; 

One that attends your ladyship’s command. 
Stl. Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good 
morrow. 

Egl. As many, worthy ladsr, to yourself. 
According to your ladyship’^ impose, 

1 am thus early come to know what service 
It is your pleasure to command me in. 

SiL 0 Eglamour, thou art a gentleman,— 
Think not 1 flatter, for I swear I do not, — 
Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplish’d. 
Thou art not ignorant what dear good '^1 
I bear unto the banish’d Valentine: 

Nor how my father would enforce me marry 
Vain Thurio, whom my very soul abhorr’d. 
Thyself hast loved; and 1 have heard thee say 
No grief did ever come so near thy heart 
As when thy lady and thy true love died. 

Upon whose grave thou vow’dst pure chastity. 
Sir Eglamour, I would go to Valentine, 

To Mantua, where I hear, he makes abode; 
And, for the ways are dangerous to pass, 

I do desire thy worthy company, 

Upon whose faith and honour I repose. 

Urge not my father’s anger, Eglamour, 

But think uiwn my grief, a lady’s grief; 

And on the justice of my flying hence, 

To keep me from a most unholy match. 
Which heaven and fortune still reward with 
1 do desire thee, even from a heart [plagues. 
As fuU of sorrows as the sea of sands, 

To bear me company, and go with me: 

If not, to hide what I have said to thee. 

That I may venture to depart alone. 

Egl. Madam, I ]»ity much your grievances; 
Which, since I know they virtuously are placed, 
I give consent to go along with you; 

Recking as little what betideth me 
As much 1 wish all good befortune you. 


When will you go? 

Sil. This evening coming. 

Egl. Where shall I meet you? 

Sil. At Friar Patrick’s cell, 

Where I intend holy confession. 

Egl. 1 will not fail your ladyship: 

Good morrow, gentle lady. 

Sil. Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour. 

[Exeunt, 

Scene IV . — The same. 

Enter Laukce, with his dog. 

lam. When a man’s servant shall play the 
cur with him, look you, it goes hard: one that 
1 brought up of a puppy; one that I saved 
from drowning, when three or four of his blind 
brothers and sisters went to it! I have taught 
him — even as one would say precisely. Thus I 
would teach a dog. 1 was sent to deliver him 
as a present to Mistress Silvia from my master; 
and 1 came no sooner into the dining-chamber 
but he steps me to her trencher and steals her 
capon’s leg. O, ’tis a foul tiring when a cur 
cannot keep himself in all companies! I would 
have, as one should say, one that takes upon 
him to be a dog indeed, to be, as it were, a dog 
at all things. If 1 had not had more wit than 
he, to take a fault upon me that he did, I think 
verily he had been bang’d for ’t; sure as 1 live 
he had suffer’d for ’t; you shall judge. Ho 
thrusts me himself into the company of three 
or four gentleman-like dogs under the duke’s 
table: he had not been there — bless the mark 
— a pissing while, but all the chamber smelt 
him. Out with the dog, says one; What cur 
is that? says another; Whip him out, says a 
third; Hang him up, says the duke. I, hav- 
ing been acquainted with the smell before, 
knew It was Crab; and goes me to the fellow 
that whips the dogs: friend, quoth I, pou 
mean to whip the dog? Ay, marry do /, quoth 
he. You do him the more wrong, quoth I; 
'twos I did the thing you wot of. He makes 
me no more ado, but whips me out of the 
chamber. How many masters would do this 
for their servant? Nay, I’ll be sworn, I have 
sat in the stocks for puddings he had stolen, 
otherwise he had been executed: I have stood 
on the pillory for geese he hath killed,; other- 
wise he had suffer’d for ’t: thou tirinkest not of 
this now! — Nay, I remember the trick you 
served me when I took my leave of Madam 
Silvia; did not I bid thee still mark me and do 
as 1 do? When didst thou see me heave up 
my leg and make water against a gentle- 
woman’s farthingale? didst thou ever see me 
do such a trick? 

Enter Proteto and Jblu. 

Pro. Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well, 
And will employ thee in some service presently. 

Jul. In what you please; — I will do what I 
can. 

Pro. I hope thou wilt.—* How now, you whore- 
son peasant? [To Lavnce. 

Where have you been these two days loitering? 

laun. Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia 
the dog you bade me. 

Pro. And what says she to my Mttie jewel? 

Laun, Marry, she says your dog wa« a cm; 



SCKNE IV.] 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VEEONA 


37 


and tells you currish, thanks is good enough for 
such a present. 

1^0. But she received my dog? 

Zaun. No, indeed, she ^d not; here have I 
brought him back again. 

Pro, What I didst thou ofEer her this from me? 
Laun, Ay, sir; the other squirrel was stolen 
from me by the hangman’s boys in the market- 
place: and then I ofer’d her mine own; who 
is a dog as big as ten of yours, and therefore 
the gift the greater. 

Pro. Go, get thee hence and find my dog 
again, 

Or ne’er return again into my sight. 

Away, I say. Stay’st thou to vex me here? 

A slave, that still an end turns me to shame. 

[Exit Lauwce. 

Sebastian, I have entertain’d thee, 

Partly that I have need of such a youth 
That can with some discretion do my business, 
For ’tis no trusting to yond foolishlout; 

But, chiefly, for thy face and thy behaviour. 
Which— if my augury deceive me not — 
Witness good bringing up, fortune, and truth: 
Therefore, know thou, for this I entertam thee. 
Go presently, and take this ring with thee, 
Deliver it to Madam Silvia: 

She loved me well deliver’d it to me. [token: 

Jul. It seems you loved not her, to leave her 
She’s dead, belike. 

Pro, Not so: I think she lives. 

Jul, Alas! 

Pro, Why dost thou cry, Alas I 
Jul. 1 cannot choose but pity her. 

Pro, Wherefore shouldst thou pity her? 

Jul* Because, methinks, that she loved you 
as well 

As you do love your lady Silvia: 

She dreams on him that has forgot her love; 
You dote on her that cares not for your love. 
*Tis pity love should be so contrary: 

And thinking on it makes me cry, Alas I 
Pro, Well, give her that ring, and there- 
withal This letter; — that’s her chamber. — Tell 
my lady I claim the promise for her heavenly 
'cture. 

our message done hie home unto my chamber, 
Where thou shalt find me sad and sohtary. 

[Fxif Proteus. 
Jul, How many women would do such a 
message? 

Alas, poor Proteus 1 thou hast entertain’d 
A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs; 

Alas, poor fool! why do X pity him 
That with his very heart despiseth me? 
Because he loves her, he despiseth me; 
Because I love him, I must pity him. 

This ring I gave him, when he parted from me. 
To bind him to remember my good will: 

And now am I — unhappy messenger — 

To plead for that which I would not obtain; 

To can^ that which I would have refused; 

To praise his faith, which I would have dis- 
praised. 

I am my master’s true confirmed love. 

But cannot be true servant to my master 
Unless I prove false traitor to myself. 

Yet will I woo for him; but yet so coldly 
As, heaven it knows, 1 would not have him 
speed. 


Enter Silvia, attended. 

Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you, be my 
mean 

To bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia. 
Sil. What woidd you with her if that I be she? 
Jul, If you be she I do entreat your patience 
To hear me speak the message 1 am sent on. 
Sil, From whom? 

Jul. From my master, Sir Proteus, madam. 
Sil, Oh! — ^he sends you for a picture? 

Jul, Ay, madam. 

Si7, Ursula, bring my picture there. 

[Picture brought 

Go, give your master this: tell him from me, 
One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget. 
Would better fit his chamber than this shadow. 

Jul. Madam, please you peruse this letter. 
Pardon me, madam ; I have unadvised 
Delivered you a paper that I should hot. 

This is the letter to your ladyship. 

Sil. I pray thee, let me look on that again. 
Jul, It may not be; good madam, pardon me. 
Sil. There, hold. 

I will not look upon your master’s lines: 

I know they are stufl’d with protestations, 

And full of new-found oaths; which he will 
break 

As easily as I do tear his paper. [ring. 

Jul, Madam, he sends your ladyship this 
Sil, The more shame for him that he sends 
it me; 

For I have heard him say a thousand times 
His Julia gave it him at his departure: 

Though his false finger have profaned the ring, 
Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong, 

Jul. She thanks you. 

Sil, What say’st thou? 

Jul. I thank you, madam, that you tender her: 
Poor gentlewoman! my master wrongs her 
much. 

Sil. Dost thou know her? 

Jul. Almost as well as I do know myself: 
To think upon her woes, I do protest, 

That I have wept an hundred several times. 

Sil. Belike she thinks that Proteus hath for- 
sook her, (sorrow. 

Jul, 1 think she doth, and that’s her cause of 
Sil. Is she not passing fair? 

Jul. She hath been fairer, madam, than 
sh^ is: 

When she did think my master loved her well, 
She, in my judgment, was as fair as you; 

But since she did neglect her looking -glass, 
And threw her sun-expelling mask away. 

The air hath starv’d the roses in her cheeks. 
And pinch’d the lily-tincture of her face, 

That now she is become as black as I. 

Sil. How tall was she? 

Jul. About my stature: for at Pentecost, 
When all our pageants of delight were play’d. 
Our youth got me to play the woman’s part. 
And I was trimm’d in Madam Julia’s gown; 
Which serv’d me as fit, by all men’s judgment, 
Asif the garment had been made for me: 
Therefore, 1 know she is about my height. 

And at that time 1 made her weep a-good, 

For I did play a lamentable part; 

Madam, ’twas Ariadne, passioning 
For Theseus’ perjury and unjust flight; 



38 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VEEONA 


fACT V. 


WMcli I so lively acted with toy tears 
That my poor mistress, moved therewithal. 
Wept bitterly ; and would I ought be dead 
If I in thought felt not her very sorrow! 

Sit. She is beholden to thee, gentle youth! — 
Alas, poor lady! desolate and left! — 

I weep myself, to think upon thy words. 

Here, youth, there is my purse: I give thee this 
For ^y sweet mistress* sake, because thou 
lov*st her. 

Farewell. {Exit Su-vu. 

Jul. And she shall thank you for ’t if e’er you 
know her. 

A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful- 
I hope my master’s suit will be but cold. 

Since she respects my mistress* love so much 
Alas, how love can trifle with itself I 
Here is her picture. Let me see ; I think, 

If I had such a tire, this face of mine 
Were full as lovely as is this of hers: 

And yet the painter flatter’d her a little, 

Unless I flatter with myself too much. 

Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow: 

If that be all the dhBFerence in his love, 

I’ll get me such a colour’d periwig. 

Her eyes are grey as glass; and so are mine: 

Ay, but her forehead’s low, and mine’s as high. 
What should it be that he respects in her 
But I can make respective in myself, 

If this fond love were not a blinded god? 

Come, shadow, come, and take this shadow up. 
For ’tis thy rival. O thou senseless form. 
Thou Shalt be worshipp’d, hiss’d, lov’d, and 
ador’d; 

And were there sense in his idolatry 
My substance should be statue in thy stead. 

I’ll use thee kindly for thy mistress* sake, 

That used me so; or else, by Jove I vow, 

I should have scratch’d out your unseeing eyes, 
To make my master out of love with thee. 

lEjdU 

ACT V. 

Scene I.— TAe same. An Abheu- 
Enter Egeamour. 

EgU The sun begins to gild the western sky: 
And now it is about the very hour 
That Silvia at Patrick’s cell should meet me. 
She will not fail; for lovers break not hours, 
ITnless it be to come before their time; 

So much they spur their expedition. 

Enter SIEvia. 

See where she comes: Lady, a happy evening! 

SiL Amen, amen! go on, good Bglamour! 
Out at the postern by the abbey wall; 

I fear I am attended by some spies. (off! 

EgU Fear not: the forest is not three leases 
If we recover that, we are sure enough. 

[Exeunt 

Scene II.— The same. An Apartment in the 
Ddke’s Palace. 

Enter Tsunio, pROtEUs, and JtJEU- 
Tpu. Sir Proteus, what says Silvia to my suit? 
Pro. 0, sir, I find her milder than she was; 
And yet fme takes exceptions at your pprson. 
Thu, What! that mylegis too long? 

JPro* No; thatisittoouttle. [rounder. 
Thu. I’ll ^ear a boot to make it somewhat 


Pro. But love will not be spurr’d to what it 
loaths. 

Thu. What says she to my face? 

Pro. She says it is a fair one. [black. 
Thu. Nay, then, the wanton lies; my face is 
Pro. But pearls are fair; and the old saying is 
Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies’ eyes. 
JuL ’Tis true, such pearls as put out ladies* 
eyes; 

For I had rather wink than look on them. 

[Asicfe. 

Thu. How likes she my discourse? 

Pro. Ill when you talk of war. [peace? 
Thu. But well when I discourse of love and 
Jul, But better, indeed, when you hold your 
peace. [As^e, 

Thu. What says she to my valour? 

Pro. 0, sir, she makes no doubt of that. 

Jul. She needs not, when she knows it 
cowardice. [Asufe. 

Thu. What says she to my birth? 

Pro, That you are well derived. 

Jut. True; from a gentleman to a fool. [Aride 
Thu. Considers she my possessions? 

Pro. 0, ay; and pities them. 

Thu. Wherefore? 

Jul. That such an ass should owe them. 

[Aside. 

Pro. That they are out by lease. 

Jul. Here comes the Duke. 

Enter Duke, 

Duke, How now, Sir Proteus? how now, 
Thurio? 

Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late? 

Thu. Not L 
Pro. Nor I. 

Duke. Saw you my daughter? 

Pro, Neither. 

Duke. Why, then she’s fled unto that peasant 
Valentine; 

And Eglamour is in her company. 

’Tis true; for Friar Lawrence met them both, 
As he in penance wander'd through the forest; 
Him he knew well, and guess’d thatit was she; 
But, being mask’d, he was not sure of it: 
Besides, she did intend confession 
At Patrick’s cell this even; and there she was 
not; 

These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence ; 
Therefore, I pray you, stand not to discourse, 
But mount you presently; and meet with me 
Upon the rising of the mountain-foot 
That leads towards Mantua, whither they are 
fled. 

Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me 

[Exit 

Thu. Why, this it is to be a peevish girl. 
That flies her fortune when it follows her: ' 

I’ll after; more to be revenged on Eglamour 
Than for the love of reckless Silvia. [Exit 
Pro. And I will follow, more for Silvia’s love 
Than hate of Eglamour that goes with her. 

[Exit 

Jul. And I will f ollow,.ttore to cross that love 
Than hate for Silvia, that is gone for love. [EriL 
Scene III.— Pronfferso/ Mantua. The Forest 
Enter Sjevia, and Outltws. 

X Out Come, come; 

Be pattent; we must bring you to our captain. 



SCENE IV.] 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 


39 


Sil - A thousand more mischances than this 
one 

Have leam’d me how to brook this patiently. 

2 Out. ' Come, bring her away. 

X Out, Where is the gentleman that was with 
her? [us, 

2 Oiif. Being nimble-footed, he hath out-run 
But Moyses and Valerius follow him. 

Go thou with her to the west end of the wood; 
There is our captain: we’ll follow him that’ sfled. 
The thicket is beset; he cannot ’scape. 

X Out. Come, 1 must bring you to our cap- 
tain’s cave; 

Fear not; he bears an honourable mind. 

And will not use a woman lawlessly. 

Sil. O Valentine, this I endure for thee. 

[Exeunt 

Scene IV.— Another part of the Forest. 
Enter Valentine. 

Vat How use doth breed a habit in a man! 
This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods, 

I better brook than flourishmg peopled towns: 
Here can I sit alone, unseen of any, 

And to .the nightingale’s complaining notes 
Tune my distresses and record my woes. 

0 thou that dost inhabit in my breast. 

Leave not the mansion so long tenantless. 
Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall, 

And leave no memory of what it was I 
Repair me with thy presence, Silvia; 

Thou gentle nymph, cherish ^y forlorn swainl- 
What halloing and what stir is this to-day! [law. 
These are my mates, that make their wills their 
Have some unhappy passenger in chase: 

They love me well; yet I have much to do 
To keep them from uncivil outrages. 

Withdraw thee, Valentine; who’s this comes 
here? [Steps aside. 

Enter Proteus, Silvia, and Julia. 

Pro. Madam, this service I have done for 
‘you, — [doth,-— 

Though you respect not aught your servant 
To hazard hfe, and rescue you from him [love. 
That would have forced your honour and your 
Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look; 
A smaller boon than this 1 cannot beg, 

And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give. 

Vat How like a dream is this I see and hear! 
Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile. 

[Aside. 

Sit 0 miserable, unhappy that I ami 
Pro. Hnhappy were you, madam, ere I came; 
But> by my coming, I have made you happy. 
Sit By thy approach thou makest me most 
unhappy. 

Jut And me, when he approacheth to your 
presence. [AsMe. 

Sil Had I been seized by a hungry lion, 
would have been a breakfast to the beast, 
ather than have false Proteus rescue me. 

0, heaven be judge how I love Valentine, 
Whose life’s as tender to me as my soul; 

And full as much,— for more there cannot be, — 

1 do detest false, perjured Proteus: 

Therefore begone: solicit me no more. 

Fro. What dangerous action, stood it next to 
death. 

Would I not undergo for one calm look? 


O, ’tis the curse in love, and still approved, 
When women cannot love where they’re be- 
[beloved. 

Sit When Proteus cannot love where he’s 
Read over Julia’s heart, thy first best love, 

For whose dear sake thou didstthenrend thy faith 
Into a thousand oaths; and adl those oaths 
Descended into perjury, to love me. [two, 
Thou hast no faith left now, unless thou hadst 
And that’sfar worse thannone; better have none 
Than plural faith, which is too much by one : 
Thou counterfeit to thy true friend! 

Pro, In love. 

Who respects friends? 

Sil. All men but Proteus. 

Pro, Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words 
Can no way change you to a milder form, 

I’ll woo you like a soldier, at arms’ end; [you. 
And love you ’gainst the nature of love— force 
Sit O heaven! 

Pro. I’ll force thee yield to my desire- 
Vat Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch; 
Thou friend of an ill fashion! 

Pro. Valentine! 

Vat Thou common friend, that’s without 
faith or love, — 

For such is a friend now; — treacherous man! 
Thou hast beguil’d my hopes; nought but mine 
eye 

Could have persuaded me. Now I dare not say 
I have one friend alive; thou wouldst disprove 
me. [hand 

Who should be trusted now, when one's right 
Is perjured ta the bosom? Proteus, 

I am sorry I must never trust thee more, 

But count the world a stranger for thy sake. 
The private wound is deepest : 0 time, most curst ! 
’Mongstallfoes, thatafriend shouldbethe worst. 

Pro. My shame and guilt confound me. — 
Forgive me, Valentine: if hearty sonow 
Be a sufiSicient ransom for offence, 
r tender it here; I do as truly suffer 
As e’er I did commit. 

Vat Then I am paid; 

And once again I do receive thee honest. — 
Who by repentance is not satisfied 
Is nor of heaven nor earth; for these are pleased ; 
By penitence the Eternal's wrath’s appeas’d;— 
And, that my love may appear plain and free, 
All ^at was mine in Silvia I give thee. 

Jut O, me, unhappy! [jPamfs. 

Pro. Look to the hoy. [is the matter? 

Vat Why, boy! why, wag! how now? what 
Look up; speak. 

Jut O good sir, my master charged me 
To deliver a ring to Madam Silvia; 

WTiich, out of my neglect, was never done. 
Pro. Where is that ring, boy? 

Jut Here ’tis: this is it. 

[Gives a ring. 

Pro. Howl let me see: 

Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia. * 

Jut 0, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook; 
This is the ring you sent to SRvia. 

[iShoms another ring. 
Pro. But . how earnest thou by this ring? at 
my depart 

I gave this unto Julia. 

' Jul. And Julia herself did give it me; 

And Julia herself hath brought it hither.^ , 



40 


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA 


(act V. 


Pro, How! Julia! 

Jul. Behold hex that gave aiin to all thy oaths, 
And entertain’d them deeply in her heart: 
How oft hast thow with perjury cleft the root? 

0 Proteus, let this hahit make thee blush! 

Be thou asham’d that 1 have took upon me 
Such an immodest raiment; if shame live 
In a disguise of love: 

It is the lesser blot, modesty finds, [minds. 
Women to change their shapes, than men their 
Pro, Than men their minds! ’tis true; O 
heaven! were man 

But constant, he were perfect: that one error 
Fills him with faults; makes him run through 
all th’ sins: 

Inconstancy falls ofi ere it begins: 

What is in Silvia’s face but I may spy 
More fresh in Julia’s with a constant eye? 

VaL Come, come, a hand from either; 

Let me be blest to make this happy close: 
*Twere pity two such friends should be long foes. 
Pro, Bear witness, Heaven, I have my wish 
for ever. 

Jut, And I have mine. 

Enter Outlaws, with Duke and Thurio. 
Out A prize, a prize, a prize! 

Vat, Forbear, I say; it is my lord the duke. 
Tour grace is welcome to a man disgrac’d, 
Banished Valentine. 

DuJk. Sir Valentine! 

Thu, Yonder is Silvia; and Silvia’s mine. 
Val, Thurio, give back, or else embrace thy 
death; 

Come not within the measure of my wrath: 

Do not name Silvia thine; if once again, 

Milan shall not behold thee. Here she stands, 
Take but possession of her with a touch; — 

1 dare thee but to breathe upon my love. — 
Thu, Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I; 

1 hold him but a fool that will endanger 
His body for a girl that loves him not: 

I claim her not, and therefore she is thine. 


Duke. The more degenerate and base art thou 
To make such means for her as thou hast done’ 
And leave her on such slight conditions. — * 
Now, by the honour of my ancestry, 

I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine, 

And think thee worthy of an empress’ love. 
Know then, I here forget all former griefs, 
Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again. — 
Plead a new state m thy unnvall’d ment, 

To which I thus subscnbe, — Sir Valentine, 
Thou art a gentleman, and well derived; 

Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserv’d her. 
VaL I thank your grace: the gift hath made 
me happy. 

I now beseech you, for your daughter’s sake, 
To grant one boon that I shall ask of you. 
Duke. I grant it for thine own, whate’er it be. 
Val. These banish’d men, that I have kept 
Withal, 

Are men endued with worthy qualities; 

Forgive them what they have committed here, 
And let them be recall’d from their exile: 
They are reform’d, civil, full of good, 

And fit for great employment, worthy lord. 
Duke, Thou hast prevail’d; I pardon them, 
and thee; 

Dispose of them as thou know’st their deserts. 
Come, let us go; we will include all jars 
With triumphs, mirth, and rare solemnity. 

Val. And, as we walk along, I dare be bold 
With our discourse to make your grace to smile; 
What think you of this page, my lord? 

Duke, I think the boy hath grace in him; he 
blushes. [than boy. 

Val X warrant you, my lord; more grace 
Duke, What mean you by that saying? 

Val Please you, I’U tell you, as we pass along, 
That you will wonder what hath fortuned. — 
Come, Proteus: ’tis your penance, but to hear 
The story of your loves discovered: 

That done, our day of marriage shall be yours; 
One feast, one house, one mutual happiness. 

[Exeunt, 



THE MERRY WIVES 
OF WINDSOR 


PERSONS REPRESENTED 


Sir John Falstaff. 

Fenton, 

Shallow, a Country Justice. 

Slender, Cousin to Shallow. 

Mr. Ford, [ two Gentlemen dwelling at 
Mr. Page, f Windsor. 

William Page, a boy. Son to Mr. Page. 
Sir Hugh Evans, a Welsh Parson. 

Dr. Caitjs, a French Physician. 

Host of the Garter Inn. 

Bardolph, I 

Pistol, rFollowers of Falstaff. 

Nym, J 


Robin, Page to Falstaff, 
Simple, Servant to Slender. 
Rugby, Servant to Dr. Caius. 


Mrs, Ford. 

Mrs, Page. 

Mrs. Anne Page, her Daughter, in love 
with Fenton. 

Mrs. Quickly, Servant to Dr. Caius. 


Servants to Page, Ford, Ac. 


Scene, — ^Windsor; and the parts adjacent. 


ACT I. 

Scene I.— Windsor. Before Page’s House. 

Enter Justice Shallow, Slender, and Sir 
Hugh Evans. 

Shat. Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will 
make a Star-chamher matter of it; if he were 
twenty Sir John Falstaffs he shall not abuse 
Robert Shallow, esquire. 

Slen. In the county of Gloster, justice of 
peace, and coram, 

Shal. Ay, cousin Slender, and Custalorum. 
Slen. Ay, and Ratolorum too; and a gentle- 
man born, master parson; who writes himself 
Armigero; in any bill, warrant, quittance, or 
obligation, — Armigero! 

Shal. Ay, that we do; and have done any 
time these three hundred years. 

iSfen. All his successors, gone before him, 
have done ’t; and all his ancestors, that come 
after him, may; they may give the dozen white 
luces in their coat. 


Shal, It is an old coat. 

Eva. The dozen white louses do become an 
old coat well; it agrees well, passant: it is a 
familiar beast to man, and siigniies — ^love. 

Shal. The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish 
is an old coat. 

Slen. I may quarter, coz? 

Shal. You may, by marrying. 

Eva. It is marring indeed, if he quarter it. 

Shal. Not a whit. 

Eva. Yes, py’r lady; if he has a quarter or 
your coat, there is but three skirts for yourself, 
in my simple conjectures: but this is all one. 
If Sir John Falstaff have committed disparage- 
ments unto you, I am of the church, and will 
be glad to do my benevolence to make atone- 
ments and compromises between you. 

Shal. The Council shall hear ii; it is a riot. 

Eva. It is not meet the Council hear a riot; 
there is no fear of Got in a riot ; the Council, look 
you, shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and not 
to hear a riot; take your vizaments in that. 



42 


MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR 


[act I. 


Shal Hal o’ my life, if I were young again, 
the sword should end it. 

Eva. It is petter that friends is the sword, 
and end it: and there is also another device in 
my prain, which, peradventnre, prings goot dis- 
cretions with it. There is Anne Page, which 
is daughter to Master George Page, which is 
pretty virginity. 

Skn. Mistress Anne Page? She has brown 
hair, and speaks small like a woman. 

Eva. It is that fery person for all the ’orld, 
as just as you will desire; and seven hundred 
pounds of monies, and gold, and silver, is her 
grandsire, upon his death’s bed, (Got deliver to 
a joyful resurrection 1) give, when she is able 
to overtake seventeen years old: it were a goot 
motion if we leave our pribbles and prabbles 
and desire a marriage between Master Abraham 
and Mistress Aone Page. 

Shah Bid her grandsire leave her seven 
hundred pound? [penny. 

Eva, Ay, and her father is make her a petter 

Shah I know the young gentlewoman; she 
has good gifts. 

Eva. Seven hundred pounds, and possibili- 
ties, is goot gifts. 

Shah Well, let us see honest Master Page. 
Is Falstaff there? 

Eva. Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a 
liar as I do despise one that is false; or, as 1 
despise one that is not true. The knight. Sir 
Jolm, is there; and, I beseech you, be ruled 
by your well-willers. I will peat the door 
[knocks] for Master Page. What, hoal Got 
pless your house here! 

Enter Page. 

Page. Who’s there? 

Eva, Here is Got’s plessing, and your friend, 
and Justice Shallow: and here young Master 
Slender; ^at, peradventures, shall tell you 
another tale, if matters grow to your likings. 

Page. 1 am glad to see your worships well: 
I thahk you for my venison, Master Shallow. 

Shah Master Page, I am glad to see you; 
much good do it your good heart! I wished 
your venison better; it was ill killed:—- How 
doth good Mistress Page?—and I love you 
always .with my heart, la; with my heart. 

Page, Sir, I thank you. 

Shah Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do. 

Page, I am glad to see you, good Master 
Slender. 

Slen, How does your fallow greyhound, sir? 
I heard say he was outrun on Cotsale. 

Page. It could not be judged, sir. 

Skn* You’ll not confess; you’ll not confess. 

Shah That he will not;— ’tie your fault; ’tia 
your fault:— ’Tis a good dog. 

Page. A cur, sir. 

Shah Sir, he’s a good dog; and a fair dog. 
Can there be more said? he is good, and fair. 
Is Sir John Falstaff here? 

Page. Sir, he is within; and I would I could 
do a good office between you. 

Eva. Xtis spoke as a Chnstians ought to speak. 

Shah He hath wronged me. Master Page. 

Page* Sir, he doth in some sort confess it. 

Shat* If it be confessed. It is not redressed; 
is not that so, Master Page? He hath wronged 


me; indeed he hath;— at a word he hath*— 
believe me; Hobert Shallow, esquire, saith he 
is wronged. 

Page. Here comes Sir John. 

Enter Sir John Falstaff, Baudolpb, Nym 
and PibTOL. 

Fah Now, Master Shallow; you'll complain 
of me to the king? 

Shah Knight, you have beaten my men 
killed my deer, and broke open my lodge. ’ 

Fah But not Irissed your keeper’s daughter? 

Shah Tut, a pin! this shall be answered. 

Fah I will answer it straight;— I have done 
all this: — That is now answered. 

Shah The Council shall know this. 

Fah ’Twere better for you if it were known 
in counsel: you’ll be laughed at- 

Eva. Pauca verba. Sir John, goot worts. 

Fah Good worts! good cabbage.— Slender, 
I broke your head; what matter have you 
against me? 

Skn. Marry f sir, I have matter in my head 
agamst you; and agamst your coney-catching 
rascals, Bardolph, Nyra, and Pistol. They 
carried me to the tavern, and made me drunk, 
and afterwards picked my pocket. 

Bard. You Banbury cheese! 

Slen. Ay, it is no matter. 

Phi. How now, Mephostophilus? 

Skn. Ay, it IS no matter. 

Ngm. Slice, I sayl^atica,j!>auca/ slice! that’s 
my humour. [tell, cousin? 

Skn. Where’s Simple, my man?— can you 

Eva. Peace: I pray you! Now let us under- 
stand. There is three umpires in this matter, 
as I understand: that is— Master Page,j^c/icif, 
Master Page; and there is myself, pdeiicit, my- 
self; and the three party is, lastly and finally, 
zmne host of the Garter. [tween tjbem. 

Page. We three to hear it, and end it be- 

Eva. Fery goot. I will make a prief of It ia 
my note-book; and we will afterwards ’ork upon 
the cause, with as great discreetly as we can. 

Fed. Pistol, — 

Pist. He hears with ears. 

Eva. The tevil and his tarn! what phrase is 
this, He hears with ear? Why, it is affectations. 

Fah Pistol, did you pick master Slender’s 
purse? 

Slen. Ay, by these gloves, did he, (or I would 
1 might never come in mine own great chamber 
again else,) of seven groats in miil-siipences, 
and two Edward shovel-bcwirds, that cost me 
two shilling and two pence a-]^«ce of Tead 
Miller, by these gloves. 

Fah Is this true, Pistol? 

Eva. No; It is false, if It is a pick-purse. 

Pist. Ha, thou mounJfe-ioi:eignerl---Sif 
John, and maiferSe;^*^"* 

I combat challenge of this latten bilbo; 

Word of denial in thy labras here; 

Word of denlaB froth and swum, thou lest. 

Skn. By these gloves, then, ’twaa he. 

Nym. Be advised, sir, and pass good hu- 
mours: I will say, mmv trap, mth you, if you 
sun the nuthook’s humour on me: that is the 
venr note of it. 

Skn. By this hat, then, he in the red face 
had it: for though I cannot remember what I 
